
Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar 

(14th April 1891 - 6th December 1956) 


BLANK 


No one can hope to make any effective mark upon his time 
and bring the aid that is worth bringing to great principles and 
struggling causes if he is not strong in his love and his hatred. I 
hate injustice, tyranny, pompousness and humbug, and my hatred 
embraces all those who are guilty of them. I want to tell my 
critics that I regard my feelings of hatred as a real force. They 
are only the reflex of the love I bear for the causes I believe in. 

— Dr. B. R. Ambedkar 

in his Preface to 
‘Ranade, Gandhi and Jinnah 



DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

VOL. 5 


Compiled 

by 

Vasant Moon 
Editorial Sub-committee 
Dr. P. T. Borale 
Dr. B. D. Phadke 
Shri S. S. Rege 
Shri Daya Pawar 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar : Writings and Speeches 

Vol. 5 


First Edition by Education Department, Govt, of Maharashtra : 14 April, 1989 
Re-printed by Dr. Ambedkar Foundation : January, 2014 


ISBN (Set) : 978-93-5109-064-9 


Courtesy : Monogram used on the Cover page is taken from 
Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar’s Letterhead. 


Secretary 

Education Department 
Government of Maharashtra 


Price : One Set of 1 to 17 Volumes (20 Books) : Rs. 3000/- 


Publisher : 

Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

15, Janpath, New Delhi - 110 001 

Phone : 011-23357625, 23320571, 23320589 

Fax : 011-23320582 

Website : www.ambedkarfoundation.nic.in 


The Education Department Government of Maharashtra, Bombay-400032 
for Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication Committee 


Printer 

M/s. Tan Prints India Pvt. Ltd., N. H. 10, Village-Rohad, Distt. Jhajjar, Haryana 


m 

Adk 



Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment 
& Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Kumari Selja 


MESSAGE 


Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the Chief Architect of Indian Constitution was 
a scholar par excellence, a philosopher, a visionary, an emancipator and a true 
nationalist. He led a number of social movements to secure human rights to the 
oppressed and depressed sections of the society. He stands as a symbol of struggle 
for social justice. 

The Government of Maharashtra has done a highly commendable work of 
publication of volumes of unpublished works of Dr. Ambedkar, which have brought 
out his ideology and philosophy before the Nation and the world. 

In pursuance of the recommendations of the Centenary Celebrations Committee 
of Dr. Ambedkar, constituted under the chairmanship of the then Prime Minister 
of India, the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation (DAF) was set up for implementation of 
different schemes, projects and activities for furthering the ideology and message 
of Dr. Ambedkar among the masses in India as well as abroad. 

The DAF took up the work of translation and publication of the Collected Works 
of Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar published by the Government of Maharashtra 
in English and Marathi into Hindi and other regional languages. I am extremely 
thankful to the Government of Maharashtra’s consent for bringing out the works 
of Dr. Ambedkar in English also by the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation. 

Dr. Ambedkar’s writings are as relevant today as were at the time when 
these were penned. He firmly believed that our political democracy must stand on 
the base of social democracy which means a way of life which recognizes liberty, 
equality and fraternity as the principles of life. He emphasized on measuring the 
progress of a community by the degree of progress which women have achieved. 
According to him if we want to maintain democracy not merely in form, but also 
in fact, we must hold fast to constitutional methods of achieving our social and 
economic objectives. He advocated that in our political, social and economic life, 
we must have the principle of one man, one vote, one value. 

There is a great deal that we can learn from Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and 
philosophy which would be beneficial to our Nation building endeavor. I am glad 
that the DAF is taking steps to spread Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and philosophy 
to an even wider readership. 

I would be grateful for any suggestions on publication of works of Babasaheb 
Dr. Ambedkar. , 



(Kumari Selja) 


Collected Works of Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar (CWBA) 

Editorial Board 

Kumari Selja 

Minister for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

and 

Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 

Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 

Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

Shri P. Balram Naik 

Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

Shri Sudhir Bhargav 

Secretary 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 


Shri Sanjeev Kumar 

Joint Secretary 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

and 

Member Secretary, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Viney Kumar Paul 

Director 

Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Kumar Anupam 

Manager (Co-ordination) - CWBA 


Shri Jagdish Prasad ‘Bharti’ 

Manager (Marketing) - CWBA 


Shri Sudhir Hilsayan 

Editor, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


FOREWORD 


This is the fifth volume of the writings of Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 
a jurist and constitutionalist par excellence of the modern India. 
The present volume brings together the unpublished writings of 
Dr. Ambedkar on Untouchables and Untouchability. India has 
rightly been called a sociological museum in which are exhibited 
cheek by jowl items that are contemporaneous with items that are 
noncontemporaneous. Dr. Ambedkar has pointed out the irrelevance 
of the caste system and its essential iniquity arising out of the 
emphasis on status by birth. It was Sir Henry Maine who in his 
“Ancient Law” has pointed out that the movement of progressive 
societies is from status to contract. The Constitution of India 
enshrines fundamental rights and provides for the machinery for 
their enforcement against the State, thereby preserving the dignity 
of the individual as the primary object of socio-economic progress. 
The writings of Dr. Ambedkar, therefore, have contemporary 
relevance in the context of the new social order which the Indian 
Constitution envisages. 

The Indian Constitution is a mid-20th century phenomenon 
and it has drawn heavily on the experience of other nations in 
working democratic institutions. Judging by the experience, it 
must be said that the Constitution has worked well. 

The State today is committed to the establishment of the 
just social order and in all walks of life there is evidence of new 
activities with a view to improving the lot of the common man. The 
evolution from status to contract, from immobility to mobility, from 
the tendency to look to the past as the ideal to the belief in bright 
future sustained by socialist ideals of equality and fraternity — these 
are some of the conspicuous features of the socio-economic scenes 
of the free India in the making of which the philosophy and the 
ideals of Dr. Ambedkar have played a critical part. 


(vi) 


FOREWORD 


It is a matter of some satisfaction that there is evidence of 
withering away of the caste in urban areas but even then, there 
is no reason for complacency and our efforts must continue to 
eradicate the evils of caste. I must, however, admit that vestiges 
of untouchability are still surviving in rural areas. It is the village 
which is still the unit of our administration and it is there that 
our future work lies. 

The unpublished writings of Dr. Ambedkar now brought together 
in this 5th volume will provide inspiration for sustained work of 
social education to those who attach primacy and importance to 
social problems over political issues. Whereas politics is a matter 
of democratic pressures and aspirations, social education brings 
about a silent revolution in values and attitudes in furtherance of 
the human understanding. I am sure, the present volume will fulfil 
the needs of such social workers and intellectuals in Maharashtra 
as well as those outside. 



14th April 1989 


(SHARAD PAWAR) 
Chief Minister of Maharashtra 


PREFACE 

‘A good book’ says Milton, “is a precious life-blood of a master 
spirit embalmed and treasured up on purpose to a life beyond life.” 

Publication of unpublished writings of Dr. B. R, Ambedkar is 
a humble tribute of the State Government to the constitutionalist 
and jurist who has been hailed as Dr. Johnson of India by critics 
and observers overseas. 

The unpublished writings of Dr. Ambedkar brought together 
in this volume constitute significant material and wealth of data 
for social research and investigation of those phenomena of social 
life which were produced by the contact of Indian people with the 
Western civilization, its heritage of liberal values, its critical spirit 
of enquiry, its genius for scientific analysis and quest for progress. 

Dr. Ambedkar combined in his personality all that is best 
in the critical western tradition and deep understanding of the 
philosophy of the East. He was a constructive critic of the Hindu 
society committed to its reformation and shared the philosophy 
of social reforms with such kindred spirits as Justice Ranade, 
Mahatma Phule and Gokhale. In a sense, therefore, Ambedkar 
was a representative of the spirit of rennaisance in Maharashtra. 

Untouch ability has been the scourge of Hindu society and 
its existence militated against the basic humanistic philosophy 
of tolerance which typified and marked the Ancient India. The 
reform of Hindu Law in the Hindu Succession Act of 1956 was a 
great triumph of legislation over custom. India had always been 
the laboratory of legislative experiments for the British rulers. 


(viii) 


PREFACE 


The success of legislation in many areas of social life of the last century 
is an encouraging sign which shows law is a powerful instrument of 
education. The Constitution of India is an experiment in social engineering 
and gives legal recognition to some of the basic jural postulates of 
civilization. The writings of Dr. Ambedkar now being published in 
this volume provide material for thought and constitute a preface to a 
programme of socio-economic measures to realise the ideals of equality 
and freedom. 

I am sure, both the average reader and the intellectual will 
find the material worthy of his attention. 



(Kamalkishor Kadam) 
Minister for Education 


Maharashtra State 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication 
Committee, Maharashtra State 


EDITORS 

1. Hon’ble Shri KAMALKISHOR KADAM 
Minister for Education 

2. Hon’ble Prof. JAVED KHAN 
Minister of State for Education 

3. Shri R. S. GAVAI 

Member of the Legislative Council 

4. Shri B. C. RAMBLE 

5. Dr. P. T. BORALE 

6. Dr. V. B. KOLTE 

7. Shri GHANASHYAM TALVATKAR 

8. Shri SHANKARRAO KHARAT 

9. Smt. SHANTABAI DANI 

10. Shri PRAKASH Y. AMBEDKAR 

11. Shri R. R. BHOLE 

12. Shri S. S. REGE 

13. Dr. BHALCHANDRA PHADKE 

14. Shri BABURAO BAGUL 

15. Shri DAYA PAWAR 

16. Prof. ARUN RAMBLE 

17. Prof. RAMAKANT YADAV 

18. Shri WAMAN NIMBALKAR 

19. Secretary, Education Department 

20. Director of Education, M. S., Pune 

21. Shri VASANT MOON 


President. 

Vice-President 

Vice-President 

Member. 

Member. 

Member. 

Member. 

Member. 

Member. 

Member. 

Member. 

Member. 

Member. 

Member. 

Member. 

Member. 

Member. 

Member. 

Member. 

Member Secretary. 
Officer on 
Special Duty. 


BLANK 


EDITORIAL 


The members of Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication 
Committee are pleased to present this 5th volume of Dr. Babasaheb 
Ambedkar’s writings to readers on behalf of the Government of 
Maharashtra. This volume is significant and unique in several respects. 
Firstly, the contents of this volume were hitherto unknown. These are 
the unpublished writings of Dr. Ambedkar which were in the custody of 
the Administrator General and the custodian of Dr. Ambedkar’s property. 
The students of Dr. Ambedkar’s writings and his devoted followers were 
anxious to read these writings. Some of the followers of Dr. Ambedkar 
had even gone to the court to secure permission for the printing of these 
writings although the manuscripts were not in their possession. Thus, 
these writings had assumed such significance that it was even feared 
that they had been destroyed or lost. 

There is a second point which is significant for this volume. This 
volume encompasses various aspects of the problem of Untouchables and 
Untouchability in India. Although Dr. Ambedkar had dwelt upon the 
theory of the origin of Untouchables in his book ‘entitled the Untouchables’, 
the essays in the present volume discuss various aspects; of this subject 
which is a scourge of the Hindu society. The humanity has witnessed 
several types of slavery existed in the world. Dr. Ambedkar discusses and 
answers as to how the slavery in other parts of the world is vanished 
and why it still exists in India. 

Dr. Ambedkar’s analysis of caste system, untouchability and Hindu 
social order was intended to bring about a homogenious Hindu society on 
the basis of the human values of equality, liberty, justice and universal 
brotherhood. 

It would not be out of place to note down a few words about the 
transfer of these papers to the Committee for publication. During his 
life time, Dr. Ambedkar published many books, but also planned many 
others. He had also expressed his intention to write his autobiography, 
the life of Mahatma Phule and the History of the Indian Army, but left 
no record of any research on these subjects. 

After his death, in 1956, all the papers including his unpublished 
writings were taken into custody by the custodian of the High Court of 
Delhi. Later, these papers were transferred to the Administrator General 
of the Government of Maharashtra. Since then, the boxes containing the 
unpublished manuscripts of Dr. Ambedkar and several other papers were 
in the custody of the Administrator General. 


(xii) 


EDITORIAL 


It was learnt that Shri J. B. Bansod, an Advocate from Nagpur, 
had filed a suit against the Government in the High Court Bench at 
Nagpur, which was later transferred to the High Court of Judicature at 
Bombay. The petitioner had made a simple request seeking permission 
from the court to either allow him to publish the unpublished writings of 
Dr. Ambedkar or to direct the Government to publish the same as they 
had assumed national significance. This litigation was pending before 
the Bombay High Court for several years. 

After the formation of this Committee and after the appointment of 
Shri V. W. Moon as Officer on Special Duty in January 1978, it was felt 
necessary to secure the unpublished writings of Dr. Ambedkar and to 
publish them as material of historical importance. Shri Moon personally 
contacted the legal heirs of Dr. Ambedkar and the Administrator General. 
Shri Bansod, Advocate, was also requested to cooperate. It must be noted 
with our appreciation that Smt. Savita B. Ambedkar, Shri Prakash Y. 
Ambedkar and his family members and Shri Bansod, Advocate, all showed 
keen interest, consented to the Government project for publication and 
agreed to transfer all the boxes containing the Ambedkar papers to the 
Government. At last, the Administrator General agreed to transfer all the 
papers contained in five iron trunks to the Government. Accordingly, Shri 
Vasant Moon took possession of the boxes on behalf of the Government 
of Maharashtra on 18th September 1981. All the five trunks are since 
stored safely in one of the Officer’s chambers in the Education Department 
of Mantralaya. 

Shri M. B. Chitnis, who, as a close associate of Dr. Ambedkar, 
was intimately familiar with the latter’s handwriting. He was at that 
time Chairman of the Editorial Board. On receipt of the papers, he 
spent a fortnight identifying which of the papers were Dr. Ambedkar’s 
manuscripts. This basic process of identification having been accomplished, 
there remained the stupendous task of reading, interpreting and collating 
the vast range of MS material in the collection, to decide in what form 
and in what order it should be presented to the public. 

In 1981, Shri Moon, OSD, set to work on this project. This work 
of matching and sorting was a delicate and difficult one as well as 
immensely time-consuming. Many of the works what Dr. Ambedkar 
had evidently intended to complete, were scattered here and there in 
an incomplete state in the manuscript form. It was therefore necessary 
to retrieve and collate the fragments in order to place them in proper 
order. Only after very many hours of reading, selecting and reflecting 
not only on the contents of these papers but also what was already 


EDITORIAL 


(xiii) 


known of Dr. Ambedkar’s work and thought, did Shri Moon arrive at 
the present selection and arrangement of those MS. 

This task was not merely strenuous at the intellectual level but also 
at the physical one due to the condition of the papers themselves. These 
had been stored in the closed boxes for more than 30 years. They were 
fumigated with insecticides, with the result that a most poisonous foul 
odour emitted from these papers. Shri Moon and his staff had to suffer 
infection of the skin and eyes and required medical treatment. 

After two years of strenuous work, Shri Moon had submitted a 
detailed report to the Editorial Board on 17th September 1983 containing 
recommendations as to the proper arrangement of the three volumes 
which were to come out, out of unpublished writings and presentation 
of the papers as they were to appear in a published form. The present 
volume consisting of various essays on Untouchables and Untouchability 
is substantially in accordance with these recommendations. 

After the proposed arrangements had been approved by the Dr. 
Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication Committee in its 
meeting dated 23rd September 1986, Shri Moon and his staff took on the 
task associated with publication, i.e. editing, proof reading, indexing etc. 

Execution of this laborious work for this 5th volume, like all the 
previous volumes, has been carried out by Mr. Vasant Moon with the 
assistance of his staff consisting of Shri L. R. Meher, Shri S. A. Waghmare 
and Smt. Usha Nevarekar. 

In the papers that the Editorial Board scrutinised, we have come 
across 51 titles of unpublished writings (including 31 of ‘Riddles in 
Hinduism’). In addition to these, we have received several unpublished 
essays of Dr. Ambedkar from Shri S. S. Rege, the Ex-Librarian of the 
Siddharth College, Bombay. The essays received from Shri Rege are 
shown by asterisk in the list mentioned below. Not all these essays are 
complete. All the essays have been divided into three volumes as under: 

VOLUME 3 : 

1. Philosophy of Hinduism 

2. The Hindu Social Order : Its Essential Principles 

3. The Hindu Social Order : Its Unique Features 

4. Symbols of Hinduism 

5. Ancient India on Exhumation 

6. The Ancient Regime — The State of the Aryan Society 

7. A Sunken Priesthood 

8. Reformers and Their Fate 


(xiv) 


EDITORIAL 


*9. The Decline and Fall of Buddhism 
10. The Literature of Brahminism 
*11. The Triumph of Brahmanism 

12. The Morals of the House — Manusmriti or the Gospel of Counter- 
Revolution 

13. The Philosophic Defence of Counter-Revolution: Krishna and 
His Gita 

14. Analytical notes of Virat Parva and Uddyog Parva 

15. Brahmins Vs Kshatriyas 

16. Shudras and the Counter-Revolution 

17. The Woman and the Counter-Revolution 

18. Buddha or Karl Marx 

19. Schemes of books. 

VOLUME 4 : 

Riddles in Hinduism (In all 32 Riddles including one from Shri 
S. S. Rege and eight appendices). 

VOLUME 5 : 

1. The Untouchables or the Children of India’s Ghetto 

2. Civilisation or Felony 

*3. The House the Hindus have built 
*4. The Rock on which it is built 
*5. Touchables v/s Untochables 
6. The Curse of Caste 
*7. From Millions to Fractions 

8. The Revolt of the Untouchables 

9. Held at Bay 

10. Their wishes are Laws unto us 
*11. Under the Providence of Mr. Gandhi 
*12. Gandhi and His Fast 

13. A Warning to the Untouchables 

14. Away from the Hindus 

15. Caste and Conversion 

*16. Christianizing the Untouchables 
*17. The Condition of the Convert 

In this Introduction we propose to deal with all the questions raised 
about these manuscripts in order to clear the air about the publication of 
all Dr. Ambedkar’s extant writings. 

It is generally believed by the followers of Dr. Ambedkar that 
Dr. Ambedkar had completed the books entitled : (1) Riddles of 
Hinduism, (2) The Buddha and Karl Marx and (3) Revolution and 
Counter-Revolution. The manuscripts of “Riddles of Hinduism” have 
been found in separate chapters bundled together in one file. These 


EDITORIAL 


(xv) 


chapters contain corrections, erasures, alterations, etc. by the hands of 
Dr. Ambedkar himself. Fortunately, the introduction by Dr. Ambedkar 
is also available for this book. We, however, regret that the final typed 
manuscript of this volume has not been found. The Committee has 
accepted the title “Riddles in Hinduism”, given by Dr. Ambedkar in his 
Introduction to the Book. 

“The Buddha and Karl Marx “ was also said to have been completed 
by Dr. Ambedkar, but we have not come across such a book among the 
manuscripts. There is, however, a typed copy of a book entitled “Gautam 
the Buddha and Karl Marx” (A Critique and Comparative Study of their 
Systems of Philosophy) by LEUKE — Vijaya Publishing House, Colombo) 
(year of publication not mentioned). One short essay of 34 pages by 
Dr. Ambedkar entitled “Buddha or Karl Marx” was however found and 
being included in the third volume. A third book, viz., “Revolution and 
Counter-Revolution”, was also believed to have been completed by Dr. 
Ambedkar. A printed scheme for this treatise has been found in the 
papers received by the Committee. It appears that Dr. Ambedkar had 
started working on various chapters simultaneously. Scattered pages 
have been found in the boxes and are gathered together. 

We are tempted here to present the process of writing of Dr. Ambedkar 
which will give an idea of the colossal efforts he used to make while 
writing of a book. He had had his own discipline. He used to make a 
blue-print of the book before starting the text. The Editorial Board found 
many such blue-prints designed by him, viz., “India and Communism”, 
“Riddles in Hinduism”, “Can I be a Hindu ?”, “Revolution and Counter- 
Revolution”, “What Brahmins have done to the Untouchables”, “Essays 
on Bhagvat Gita”, “Buddha and Karl Marx”, etc. But some of these were 
not even begun and those which were begun were left incomplete. 

It will be interesting to present an illustration. Dr. Ambedkar had 
prepared a blue-print for a book entitled “India and Communism”. The 
contents are as follows : 

Part — I The Pre-requisites of Communism 
Chapter 1 — The Birth-place of Communism 
Chapter 2 — Communism & Democracy 
Chapter 3 — Communism & Social Order 

Part — II India and the Pre-requisites of Communism 
Chapter 4 — The Hindu Social Order 
Chapter 5 — The Basis of the Hindu Social Order 
Chapter 6 — Impediments to Communism arising from the Social Order. 


(xvi) 


EDITORIAL 


Part — III What then shall we do? 

Chapter 1 — Marx and the European Social Order 

Chapter 2 — Manu and the Hindu Social Order 

Dr. Ambedkar could complete only Chapters 4 and 5 of the scheme 
viz., “The Hindu Social Order” and “The Basis of the Hindu Social Order”. 
It appears that when it struck to him that he should deal with two more 
topics in Part III he added those two topics in his own handwriting on 
the typed page. In the same well-bound file of typed material, there 
appears a page entitled “Can I be a Hindu?” which bears his signature 
in pencil and a table of contents on the next page as follows : 

Introduction 

Symbols of Hinduism 

Part-I — Caste 

Part-II — Cults — Worship of Deities 

Part-Ill — Superman 

The third page bears sub-titles of the chapters as follows: 

1. Symbols represent the soul of a thing 

2. Symbols of Christianity 

3. Symbols of Islam 

4. Symbols of Jainism 

5. Symbols of Buddhism 

6. Symbols of Hinduism 

7. What are the Symbols of Hinduism? 

Three 

1. Caste. 

2. Cults — 

(1) Rama 

(2) Krishna 

(3) Shiva 

(4) Vishnu 

3. Service of Superman 

The plan as designed above remains incomplete except for the chapter 
on, “Symbols of Hinduism”. 

The 24 riddles as proposed in his original plan were changed often in 
blue-print by Dr. Ambedkar. The seriatim of the contents and chapters 
and the arrangement of the file did not synchronize. The chapters have 
been arranged according to the table of contents in Vol. 4. 

At the end we are confident that our time and our pains will not 
go unrewarded when Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar’s hitherto unpublished 
works will be brought in a proper form before the general public as well 
as interested scholars. 


EDITORIAL 


(xvii) 


We place on record our sense of gratitude to Smt. Savita B. Ambedkar, 
Shri Prakash Y. Ambedkar and his family members for having granted 
permission to the Government for publication of complete writings of 
Dr. Ambedkar. 

The present volume consists those unpublished writings which have 
been received from the Administrative General who along with Shri J. B. 
Bansod deserve our thanks for smoothening the process of transfer of 
these manuscripts. 

We express our sincere gratitude to Shri Sharad Pawar, the Hon’ble 
Chief Minister, Kamalkishor Kadam, the Education Minister, and Prof. 
Javed Khan, the Minister of State for Education, Maharashtra State 
for their decision to publish all the remaining volumes before the birth 
centenary day of Dr. Ambedkar. We are thankful to Shri V. R. Dravid, 
Secretary, Education Department and Shri R. S. Jambhule, Director 
of Education, M.S., for their cooperation and also Shri R. R. Pardeshi, 
Dy. Director and Shri E. M. Meshram, Junior Administrative Officer, 
all from Education Department for showing interest in the process of 
publication. 

Shri S. S. Rege spared the manuscripts of 8 essays of Dr. Ambedkar 
for this volume which had been in his possession for many years. These 
essays have enriched the material. The members of the committee are 
most indebted to Shri Rege. 

Shri B. Bracken, Director; Shri P. S. More, Dy. Director; Shri R. J. 
Mahatekar, Manager in-charge; Shri J. S. Nagvekar, Operator, Film 
Setter, and the staff of the Department of Printing and Stationery 
deserve full appreciation and thanks for their expeditious printing with 
utmost care and sincerity. 


EDITORS 


Bombay 
14th April 1989 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source 
Material Publication Committee 


Maharashtra State 


BLANK 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Page 

Foreword .. .. (v) 

Preface .. .. (vii) 

Editorial .. .. (xi) 

BOOK I— UNTOUCHABLES OR THE CHILDREN OF 
INDIA’S GHETTO 

PART I— WHAT IT IS TO BE AN UNTOUCHABLE 
Chapter 1 Untouchability — Its Source .. .. 3 

Chapter 2 Untouchables — Their Numbers .. .. 6 

Chapter 3 Slaves and Untouchables .. .. 9 

Chapter 4 Outside the Fold .. .. 19 

Chapter 5 Unfit for human Association .. .. 27 

PART II 

Chapter 6 Untouchability and Lawlessness .. .. 35 

Chapter 7 Why lawlessness is Lawful? .. .. 62 

PART III— ROOTS OF THE PROBLEM 

Chapter 8 Parallel Cases .. .. 75 

Chapter 9 Hindus and want of Public Conscience .. .. 89 

Chapter 10 Hindus and their want of Social Conscience .. .. 94 

Chapter 11 The Hindu and his belief in Caste .. .. 100 

PART IV— WHAT THE UNTOUCHABLES HAVE TO FACE 
Chapter 12 Antagonism of the Administration .. .. 103 

Chapter 13 Problem of Discrimination .. .. 108 

Chapter 14 Problem of Isolation .. .. 112 

BOOK II— SOCIAL 

Chapter 15 Civilization or Felony .. .. 127 

Chapter 16 The House the Hindus have built .. .. 145 

Chapter 17 The Rock on which it is built .. .. 170 

Chapter 18 Touchables versus Untouchables .. .. 192 

Chapter 19 The Curse of Caste .. .. 211 


(xx) 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 



BOOK III— POLITICAL 

Page 

Chapter 20 

From millions to fractions 

229 

Chapter 21 

The Revolt of the Untouchables 

247 

Chapter 22 

Held at Bay 

.. .. 259 

Chapter 23 

Their wishes are Laws unto us 

272 

Chapter 24 

Under the Providence of Mr. Gandhi 

287 

Chapter 25 

Gandhi and his fast 

.. .. 329 

Chapter 26 

A warning to the Untouchables 

.. .. 396 


BOOK IV— RELIGIOUS 


Chapter 27 

Away from the Hindus 

.. .. 403 

Chapter 28 

Caste and Conversion 

422 

Chapter 29 

Christianising the Untouchables 

426 

Chapter 30 

The condition of the convert 

445 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


BOOK 1 


Untouchables or 
The Children of 
India’s Ghetto 


This is a 208-page MS (Second copy) under the title 
“Untouchables or The Children of India’s Ghetto”. 
The whole MS forms an independent book by itself 
It has a ‘Table of Contents’ divided into 4 parts, 
which are further sub-divided into 14 chapters. Slight 
modifications had to be made in the arrangement of the 
chapters to bring them in conformity with that of ‘Table 
of Contents’ . Except few corrections in the titles of the 
chapters, the text is untouched by the author. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


3 


PART I 

What it is to be an Untouchable 

Chapter 1 

UNTOUCH ABILITY — ITS SOURCE 

It is usual to hear all those who feel moved by the deplorable 
condition of the Untouchables unburden themselves by uttering the cry 
“We must do something for the Untouchables”. One seldom hears any 
of the persons interested in the problem saying ‘Let us do something 
to change the Touchable Hindu’. It is invariably assumed that the 
object to be reclaimed is the Untouchables. If there is to be a Mission, 
it must be to the Untouchables and if the Untouchables can be cured, 
untouchability will vanish. Nothing requires to be done to the Touchable. 
He is sound in mind, manners and morals. He is whole, there is nothing 
wrong with him. Is this assumption correct ? Whether correct or not, 
the Hindus like to cling to it. The assumption has the supreme merit 
of satisfying themselves that they are not responsible for the problem 
of the Untouchables. 

How natural is such an attitude is illustrated by the attitude of 
the Gentile towards the Jews. Like the Hindus the Gentiles also do 
not admit that the Jewish problem is in essence a Gentile problem. 
The observations of Louis Goulding on the subject are therefore very 
illuminating. In order to show how the Jewish problem is in its essence 
a Gentile problem, he says: 

“I beg leave to give a very homely instance of the sense in which 
I consider the Jewish Problem in essence a Gentile Problem. A close 
acquaintance of mine is a certain Irish terrier of mixed pedigree, 
the dog Paddy, who is to my friend John Smith as the apple of both 
his eyes. Paddy dislikes Scotch terriers; it is enough for one to pass 
within twenty yards of Paddy to deafen the neighbourhood with 
challenges and insults. It is a practice which John Smith deplores, 
which, therefore, he does his best to check — all the more as the 
objects of Paddy’s detestation are often inoffensive creatures, who 
seldom speak first. Despite all his affection for Paddy, he considers, 
as I do, that Paddy’s unmannerly behaviour is due to some measure 
of original sin in Paddy. It has not yet been suggested to us that 
what is here involved is a Scotch Terrier Problem and that when 
Paddy attacks a neighbour who is peacefully engaged in inspecting 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


4 


4 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the evening smells it is the neighbour who should be arraigned for 

inciting to attack by the fact of his existence.” 

There is here a complete analogy between the Jewish Problem and 
the problem of the Untouchables. What Paddy is to the Scotch Terrier, 
the Gentile is to the Jews, and the Hindu is to the Untouchables. But 
there is one aspect in which the Jewish Problem stands in contrast to 
the Gentile Problem. The Jews and the Gentiles are separated by an 
antagonism of the creeds. The Jewish creed is opposed to that of the 
Gentile creed. The Hindus and the Untouchables are not separated by 
any such antagonism. They have a common creed and observe the same 
cults. 

The second explanation is that the Jews wish to remain separate 
from the Gentiles. While the first explanation is chauvinistic the second 
seems to be founded on historical truth. Many attempts have been made 
in the past by the Gentiles to assimilate the Jews. But the Jews have 
always resisted them. Two instances of this may be referred. 

The first instance relates to the Napoleonic regime. After the National 
Assembly of France had agreed to the declaration of the ‘Rights of man’ to 
the Jews, the Jewish question was again reopened by the guild merchants 
and religious reactionaries of Alsace. Napoleon resolved to submit the 
question to the consideration of the Jews themselves. He convened an 
Assembly of Jewish Notables of France, Germany and Italy in order to 
ascertain whether the principles of Judaism were compatible with the 
requirements of citizenship as he wished to fuse the Jewish element with 
the dominant population. The Assembly consisting of 111 deputies, met 
in the Town Hall of Paris on the 25th of July 1806, and was required 
to frame replies to twelve questions relating mainly to the possibility of 
Jewish patriotism, the permissibility of inter-marriage between Jew and 
Non- Jew, and the legality of usury. So pleased was Napoleon with the 
pronouncements of the Assembly that he summoned a Sanhedrin after 
the model of the ancient council of Jerusalem to convert them into the 
decree of a Legislative body. The Sanhedrin, comprising of 71 deputies 
from France, Germany, Holland and Italy met under the presidency of 
Rabbi Sinzheim, of Strassburg on 9th February 1807, and adopted a sort of 
Charter which exhorted the Jews to look upon France as their fatherland, 
to regard its citizens as their brethren, and to speak its language, and 
which also pressed toleration of marriages between Jews and Christians 
while declaring that they could not be sanctioned by the synagogue. It 
will be noted that the Jews refused to sanction intermarriages between 
Jews and non-Jews. They only agreed to tolerate them. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


5 


UNTOUCHABILITY — ITS SOURCE 5 

The second instance relates to what happened when the Batavian 
Republic was established in 1795. The more energetic members of the 
Jewish community pressed for a removal of the many disabilities under 
which they laboured. But the demand for the fuller rights of citizenship 
made by the progressive Jews was at first, strangely enough, opposed by 
the leaders of the Amsterdam community, who feared that civil equality 
would militate against the conservation of Judaism and declared that 
their co-religionists renounced their rights of citizenship in obedience to 
the dictates of their faith. This shows that the Jews preferred to live as 
strangers rather than as members of the community. 

Whatever the value of their explanations the Gentiles have at least 
realized that there rests upon them a responsibility to show cause for 
their unnatural attitude towards the Jews. The Hindu has never realised 
this responsibility of justifying his treatment of the Untouchables. The 
responsibility of the Hindus is much greater because there is no plausible 
explanation he can offer in justification of untouchability. He cannot 
say that the Untouchable is a leper or a mortal wretch who must be 
shunned. He cannot say that between him and the Untouchables, there 
is a gulf due to religious antagonism which is not possible to bridge. Nor 
can he plead that it is the Untouchable who does not wish to assimilate 
with the Hindus. 

But that is not the case with the Untouchables. They too are in a 
different sense an eternal people who are separate from the rest. But 
this separateness, their segregation is not the result of their wish. 
They are punished not because they do not want to mix. They are 
punished because they want to be one with the Hindus. In other words, 
though the problem of the Jews and of the Untouchables is similar in 
nature — inasmuch as the problem is created by others — it is essentially 
different. The Jew’s case is one of the voluntary isolation. The case of 
the Untouchables is that of compulsory segregation. Untouchability is 
an infliction and not a choice. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


6 


Chapter 2 

UNTOUCHABLES— THEIR NUMBERS 


Before one tries to know what it is to be an Untouchable one would 
like to know what is the total population of the Untouchables of India. 
For this one must go to the Census Report. 

The first general census of India was taken in the year 1881. Beyond 
listing the different castes and creeds and adding up their numbers so 
as to arrive at the total figure of the population of India the Census of 
1881 did nothing. It made no attempt to classify the different Hindu 
castes either into higher and lower or touchable and untouchable. The 
second general census of India was taken in the year 1891. It was at 
this census that an attempt to classify the population on the basis of 
caste and race and grade was made by the Census Commissioner for 
the first time. But it was only an attempt. 

The third general census of India was taken in 1901. At this census 
a new principle of classification was adopted namely “Classification by 
Social precedence as recognised by native public opinion”. To this serious 
opposition was raised by high caste Hindus to the enumeration by caste 
in the Census Report. They insisted on the omission of the question 
regarding caste. 

This objection did not have any effect on the Census Commissioner. 
In the opinion of the Census Commissioner enumeration by caste was 
important and necessary. It was argued by the Census Commissioner 
that “whatever view may be taken of the advantages or disadvantages 
of caste as a social institution, it is impossible to conceive of any useful 
discussion of the population questions in India in which caste would 
not be an important element. Caste is still ‘the foundation of the 
Indian social fabric’ and the record of caste is still ‘the best guide to 
the changes in the various social strata in the Indian Society’. Every 
Hindu (using the term in its most elastic sense) is born into a caste 
and his caste determines his religious, social, economic and domestic 
life from the cradle to the grave. In western countries the major factors 
which determine the different strata of society viz. wealth, education 
and vocation are fluid and catholic and tend to modify the rigidity of 
birth and hereditary position. In India spiritual and social community 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


7 


UNTOUCHABLES— THEIR NUMBERS 7 

and traditional occupation override all other factors. Thus where in 
censuses of western countries an economic or occupational grouping 
of the population affords a basis for the combination of demographic 
statistics, the corresponding basis in the case of the Indian population 
is the distinction of religion and caste. Whatever view may be taken of 
caste as a national and social institution it is useless to ignore it, and so 
long as caste continues to be used as one of the distinguishing features 
of an individual’s official and social identity it cannot be claimed that 
a decinnial enumeration helps to perpetuate an undesirable institution. 

This Census of 1901 did not result in fixing the total population 
of the Untouchables at any exact figure. This was due to two reasons. 
In the first place no exact tests were applied to determine who is an 
Untouchable. Secondly a class of the population which was economically 
and educationally backward but not Untouchable was mixed up with 
those who were actually Untouchables. 

The Census of 1911 went a step further and actually laid down ten 
tests to mark off the Untouchables from those who were Touchables. Under 
these, tests the Census Superintendents made a separate enumeration 
of castes and tribes who (1) denied the supremacy of the Brahmins; (2) 
did not receive the Mantra from Brahmana or other recognized Hindu 
Guru; (3) denied the authority of the Vedas; (4) did not worship the 
great Hindu Gods; (5) were not served by good Brahmanas; (6) have no 
Brahmin priests at all; (7) have no access to the interior of the ordinary 
Hindu temple; (8) cause pollution; (9) bury their dead and (10) eat beef 
and do not reverence the cow. 

The separation of the Untouchables from the Hindus was insisted 
upon by the Muslims in a memorial to the Government dated 27th 
January 1910 in which they claimed that their representation in the 
political bodies of the country should be in proportion to the population 
of Touchable Hindus and not Hindus as a whole because they contended 
that the Untouchables were not Hindus. 

Be that as it may the Census of 1911 marks the beginning of the 
ascertainment of the population of the Untouchables. Efforts in the same 
direction were continued at the Census of 1921 and 1931. 

As a result of these efforts the Simon Commission which came to 
India in 1930 was able to state with some degree of surety that total 
population of Untouchables in British India was 44.5 millions. 

Suddenly, however, in 1932 when the Lothian Committee came 
to India to investigate the question of franchize for the reformed 
Legislatures and began its investigation, the Hindus adopted a 
challenging mood and refused to accept the figure given by the Simon 
Committee as a true figure of the Untouchables of India. In some 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


8 


8 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

provinces the Hindus went to the length of denying that there were any 
Untouchables at all. This is due to the fact that the Hindus had by now 
realized the danger of admitting the existence of the Untouchables. For 
it meant that a part of the representation enjoyed by the Hindus will 
have to be given up by them to the Untouchables. 

The Census of 1941 must be left out of consideration. It was taken 
during the war and it was a sort of a rough measure. 

The latest Census is that of 1951. The following figures are taken 
from the statement issued by the Census Commissioner. The Census 
Commissioner gives the population of the Scheduled Castes in India as 
513 lakhs. 

The total population of India, as shown by the 1951 census is 3,567 
lakhs, excluding 1.35 lakhs, the enumeration records in whose case were 
destroyed by fire in the Census Tabulation Office at Jullundur. 

Out of the total population of 3,567 lakhs, 2,949 lakhs live in rural 
areas and 618 lakhs in the urban areas. The Scheduled Castes in rural 
areas total 462 lakhs and in urban areas their figures are 51 lakhs. 

Non-agricultural classes for the whole population total 1,076 lakhs, 
the Scheduled Castes 132 lakhs. 

Cultivators of land, wholly or mainly owned, and their dependents 
total 1,674 lakhs for the whole population, 174 lakhs for the Scheduled 
Castes. 

Cultivators of land, wholly or mainly unowned and their dependants 
are 316 lakhs for the whole of India, 56 lakhs for the Scheduled Castes. 

Cultivating labourers and their dependants are 448 lakhs for the 
whole of India, 148 lakhs for the Scheduled Castes. 

Figures for non-agricultural classes are as follows : 

Production other than Cultivation: Total 377 lakhs, Scheduled Castes 
53 lakhs. 

Commerce: Total 213 lakhs, Scheduled Castes 9 lakhs. 

Transport: Total 56 lakhs. Scheduled Castes 6 lakhs. 

Other services and miscellaneous sources: Total 430 lakhs, Scheduled 
Castes 64 lakhs. 

Out of a total Scheduled Caste population of over 513 lakhs, 114 
lakhs live in North India (Uttar Pradesh); 128 lakhs in East India (Bihar, 
Orissa, West Bengal, Assam, Manipur and Tripura); 110 lakhs in South 
India (Madras, Mysore, Travancore- Cochin and Coorg); 31 lakhs in West 
India (Bombay, Saurashtra and Kutch); 76 lakhs in Central India (Madhya 
Pradesh, Madhya Bharat, Hyderabad, Bhopal and Vindhya Pradesh); 
and 52 lakhs in North-West India (Rajasthan, Punjab, Patiala and East 
Punjab States Union, Ajmer, Delhi, Bilaspur and Himachal Pradesh). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


9 


Chapter 3 

SLAVES AND UNTOUCHABLES 


Far from being ashamed of untouchability, the Hindus try to defend 
it. The line of their defence is that the Hindus have never upheld slavery 
as other nations have done and that in any case, untouchability is not 
worse than slavery. This argument was used by no less a person than 
the late Lala Lajpat Rai in his book called ‘Unhappy India’. It would 
have been unnecessary to waste one’s time in refuting this countercharge 
had it not been that on account of its plausibility the world at large not 
having witnessed anything worse than slavery is likely to believe that 
untouchability cannot be worse than slavery. 

The first reply to the counter-charge is that it is quite untrue that 
slavery was not recognised by the Hindus. Slavery is a very ancient 
institution of the Hindus. It is recognised by Manu, the Hindu lawgiver 
and has been elaborated and systematized by the other Smriti writers 
who followed Manu. Slavery among the Hindus was never merely ancient 
institution which functioned only in some hoary past. It was an institution 
which continued throughout Indian history down to the year 1843 and 
if it had not been abolished by the British Government by law in that 
year, it might have continued even today. 

As to the relative merits of slavery and untouchability, the best way 
to meet the counter-charge is to compare and contrast untouchability 
with slavery as it existed in ancient Rome and in modern America. 

What was the de facto condition of the slaves in the Roman Empire? 
The best description I know of is to be found in Mr. Barrow’s Slavery 
in the Roman Empire. Says 1 Mr. Barrow: 

“Hitherto, it is the repulsive side of household slavery that has 
been sketched. There is also another aspect. The literature reveals 
the vast household as normal. It is, of course, the exception. Large 
slave staffs undoubtedly existed, and they are generally to be found 
in Rome. In Italy and the Provinces there was less need of display; 
many of the staff of the Villa were engaged in productive work 
connected with land and its produce. The old-fashioned relationship 
1 Slavery in the Roman Empire, pp. 47-49. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


10 


10 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

between foreman and slave remained there; the slave was often 
a fellow worker. The kindliness of Pliny towards his staff is well- 
known. It is in no spirit of self-righteousness, and in no wish to 
appear in a favourable light in the eyes of the future generations 
which he hoped would read his letters that he tells of his distress 
at the illness and death of his slaves. The household (or Pliny) is 
the slaves’ republic. Pliny’s account of his treatment of his slaves 
is sometimes regarded as so much in advance of general or even 
occasional practice as to be valueless as evidence. There is no 
reason for this attitude. 

From reasons both of display and genuine literary interest, 
the rich families attached to their households, slaves trained in 
literature and art. Clavisices Sabinus is said by Seneda to have 
had eleven slaves taught to recite Homer, Hesioid, and nine lyric 
poets by heart. ‘Book cases would be cheaper’, said a rude friend. 

‘No, what the household knows the master knows’ was the answer. 
But, apart from such abuses, educated slaves must have been 
a necessity in the absence of printing;.... The busy lawyer, the 
dilettante poet, the philosopher and educated gentlemen of literary 
tastes and need of copyists and readers and secretaries. Such men 
were naturally linquistic also; a librarius who dies at the age of 
twenty boasts that he was ‘literatus Graecis Latinis’. Amanuenses 
were common enough; librarians are to be found in public and 
private libraries.... Shorthand writing was in common use under the 
Empire, and slave Notarii were regularly employed. Many freemen, 
rhetoricians and grammarians are collected by Snetonius in a special 
treatise. Verrius Flaccus was tutor to Austus’s grandsons, and at 
death was publicly honoured by a statue. Scribonius Aphrodisius 
was the slave and disciple of Orbilius and was afterwards freed 
by Scribenia. Hyginus was librarian of the Palatine Library, in 
which office he was followed by Julius Modestus, his own freeman. 

We hear of freemen historians of a slave philosopher who was 
encouraged to argue with his master, friends of slaves and freed 
architects. Freemen as doctors occur frequently in the inscriptions, 
some of them specialists, they had been trained in big households 
as slaves, as is shown by one or two examples; after Manumission 
they rose to eminence and became notorious for their high fees.” 

The tastes of some section of society demanded that dancers, 
singers, musicians, montebanks, variety artists, athletic trainers 
and messieurs should be forthcoming. All these are to be found in 
slavery, often trained by teachers who had acquired some reputation 1 . 


Slavery in the Roman Empire, p. 63. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


11 


SLAVES AND UNTOUCHABLES 11 

The age of Augustus was the beginning of a period of commercial 

and industrial expansion slaves had indeed been employed (in arts 

and crafts) before, but the sudden growth of trade.... their employment 
in numbers that would otherwise have been unnecessary. Romans 
engaged more freely and more openly in various forms of commercial 
and industrial venture. Yet, even so, the agent became more important, 
for commercial activities became more widespread; and such agents 
were almost necessarily slaves.... (this is so) because the bonds of 
slavery (are elastic). (They could be) so relaxed as to offer an incentive 
to the slave to work by the prospect of wealth and freedom, and so 
tightened as to provide a guarantee to the master against loss from 
the misconduct of his slave. In business contracts between slave and 
master or third person seem to have been common, and the work thus 
done, and no doubt, the profits were considerable.... Renting of land to 
the slave has already been noticed.... and in industry much the same 
system was used in various forms; the master might lease a bank, or 
a business of the use of a ship, the terms being a fixed return or the 
slave being paid on a commission basis 1 . 

The earnings of the slave became in law his peculium was saved 
it might be used to a variety of purpose. No doubt in many cases this 
fund was expended in providing food or pleasure. But peculium must 
not be regarded merely as petty savings, casually earned and idly 
spent. The slave who made his master’s business yield profits, to his 
own profit too, very often, had a keen sense of the best use to make 
up his own money. Often he reinvested it in his master’s business or 
in enterprises entirely unrelated to it. He could enter into business 
relations with his master, from whom he came to be regarded as 
entirely distinct, or he could make contracts with a third person. He 
could even have procurators to manage his own property and interests. 
And so with the peculium may be found not only land, houses, shops, 
but rights and claims. 

The activities of slaves in commerce are innumerable; numbers of 
them are shopkeepers selling every variety of food, bread, meat, salt, 
fish, wine, vegetables, beans, aupine-seed, honey, curd, ham, ducks and 
fresh fish; others deal in clothing — sandals, shoes, gowns and mantles. 
In Rome, they plied their trade in the neighbourhood of the Circus 
Mamimus, or the Porticus Trigemimus; or the Esquiline Market, or 
the Great Mart (on the Caolian Hill) or the Suburra 2 .... 

1 Slavery in the Roman Empire, pp. 101-102. 

2 Ibid., p. 105. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


12 


12 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The extent to which slave secretaries and agents acted for their 
masters is shown very clearly in the receipts found in the house of 
Caecillius Jucundus at Pompei 1 . 

That the State should possess slaves is not surprising; war, after 
all, was the affair of the State and the captive might well be State- 
property. What is surprising is the remarkable use made of public 
slaves under the Empire and the extraordinary social position occupied 
by them.... 

“ ‘Public slave’ came to mean before the Empire a slave of the State 
employed in its many offices, and the term implied a given occupation 
and often social position. The work of slaves of the State, slaves of 
the townships, and slaves of Caesar comprises much of what would 
now fall to parts of the higher and the whole of the lower branches 
of the civil services and of the servants of Municipal Corporations, 
working both with head and hands.... In the subordinate levels (of 
the Treasury) there worked numbers of clerks and financial officers, 
all freedmen and slaves. The business dealt with must have been of 
vast range.... The Mint.... the immediate head was a knight, in charge 
of the minting processes.... a freedman was placed; under him served 
freedmen and slaves.... From one branch of State service, at any 
rate, slaves were rigorously excluded, except on one or two occasions 
of exceptional stress. They were not allowed to fight in the Army 
because not thought worthy of honour. Doubtless other motives were 
present also; it would be dangerous experiment to train too many 
slaves systematically in the use of Arms. If, however, slaves served 
rarely in the fighting line, they are regularly to be found in great 
numbers behind it employed as servants, and in the commissariat 
and transport. In the fleet slaves were common enough 2 .” 

II 

Let us turn to the de facto position of the Negro in the United 
States during the period in which he was slave in the eye of the law. 
Here are some facts 3 which shed a good deal of light on his position: 

“Lafayette himself had observed that white and black seamen and 
soldiers had fought and messed together in the Revolution without 
bitter difference. Down in Granville County, North Carolina, a full 
blooded Negro, John Chavis, educated in Princeton University, was 
conducting a private school for white students and was a licentiate 

1 Slavery in the Roman Empire, p. 106. 

2 Ibid,., pp. 130-147. 

3 Charles C. Johnson’s ‘The Negro in American Civilization’. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


13 


SLAVES AND UNTOUCHABLES 13 

under the local Preshytary, preaching to white congregations in the 
State. One of his pupils became Governor of North Carolina, another 
the State’s most prominent Whig senator. Two of his pupils were sons 
of the Chief Justice of North Carolina. The father of the founder of 
the greatest military Academy of the State attended his school and 

boarded in his home Slave labour was used for all kinds of work 

and the more intelligent of the Negro slaves were trained as artisans 
to be used and leased. Slave artisans would bring twice as much as 
an ordinary field hand in the market. Master craftsmen owned their 
staff. Some masters, as the system became more involved, hired slaves 
to their slave artisans. Many slave artisans purchased their freedom 
by the savings allowed them above the normal labour expected.” 

“The advertisements for runaways and sales are an index to 
this skill. They received the same or better wages than the poor 
white labourer and with the influence of the master got the best 
jobs. The Contractors for masons’ and carpenters’ work in Athens, 
Georgia in 1838 were petitioned to stop showing preference to Negro 
labourers. “The white man is the only real, legal, moral, and civil 
proprietor of this country and state. The right of his proprietorship 
reached from the date of the studies of those whitemen, Copernicus 
and Galileo, who indicated the sphericity of the earth; which 
sphericity hinted to another white man, Columbus, the possibility 
by a westerly course of sailing, of finding land. Hence by whitemen 
alone was this continent discovered, the whitemen alone, aye, those 
to whom you decline to give money for bread or clothes for their 
famishing families, in the logical manner of withholding work from 
them defending Negroes too in the bargain.” In Atlanta in 1858 a 
petition signed by 2 white mechanics and labourers sought protection 
against the black slave artisans of masters who resided in other 
sections. The very next year sundry white citizens were aggrieved 
that the City Council tolerated a Negro dentist to remain and 
operate in their midst. ‘In justice to ourselves and the community 
it ought to be abated. We, the residents of Atlanta, appeal to you 
for justice’. A Census of free Negroes in Richmond County, Georgia, 
in 1819 showed carpenters, barbers, boatcorkers, saddlers, spinners, 
millwrights, holsters, weavers, harness makers, sawmill attendants 
and steamboat pilots. A Negro shoe-maker made by hand the boots 
in which President Munrow was inaugurated. Harriet Martineau 
marvelled at the slave workmanship in the delicately tiled floors 
of Thomas Jefferson’s home at Monticello. There still stands in the 
big house of the old plantation, heavy marks of the hands of these 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


14 


14 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Negro craftsmen, strong mansions built of timber hewn from the 
original oak and pinned together by wooden pins. Negro women 
skilled in spinning and weaving worked in the mills. Buckingham in 
1839 found them in Athens, Georgia, working alongside with white 
girls without apparent repugnance or objection. Negro craftsmen 
in the South, slave and free fared better than their brothers in 
the North. In 1856 in Philadelphia, of 1637 Negro craftsmen 
recorded, less than two-thirds could use their trades; ‘because of 
hostile prejudice’. The Irish who were pouring into America from 
the very beginning of the nineteenth century were being used in 
the North on approximately the same motives of preference which 
governed Negro slavery. ‘An Irish Catholic, it was argued in their 
favour, seldom attempts to rise to a higher condition than that 
in which he is placed, while the Negro often makes the attempt 
with success. Had not the old Puritan Oliver Cromwell, while the 
traffic in black slaves was on, sold all the Irish not killed in the 
Drogheda Massacre, into Barbados? Free and fugitive Negroes in 
New York and Pennsylvania were in constant conflict with this 
group and the bitter hostility showed itself most violently in the 
draft riots of the New York. These Hibernians controlled the hod 
carrying and the common labour jobs, opposing every approach 
of the Negro as a menace to their slight hold upon America and 
upon a means of livelihood.” 


Ill 

Such was the de facto condition of the Roman slave and the 
American Negro slave. Is there anything in the condition of the 
Untouchables of India which is comparable with the condition 
of the Roman slave and the American Negro slave? It would 
not be unfair to take the same period of time for comparing the 
condition of the Untouchables with that of the slaves under the 
Roman Empire. But I am prepared to allow the comparison of 
the condition of the slaves in the Roman Empire to be made 
with the condition of the Untouchables of the present day. It is a 
comparison between the worst of one side and the best of the other, 
for the present times are supposed to be the golden age for the 
Untouchables. How does the de facto condition of the Untouchables 
compare with the de facto condition of the slaves? How many 
Untouchables are engaged as the slaves in Rome were, in professions 
such as those of Librarians, Amanuenses, Shorthandwriters ? 
How many Untouchables are engaged, as the slaves in Rome 
were, in such intellectual occupations as those of rhetoricians, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


15 


SLAVES AND UNTOUCHABLES 15 

grammarians, philosophers, tutors, doctors and artists? How many 
Untouchables are engaged, as the slaves in Rome? Can any Hindu dare to 
give an affirmative answer to anyone of these queries? The Untouchables 
are completely shut out from any of these avenues in which the slaves 
found so large a place. This proves how futile is the line of defence 
adopted by the Hindus to justify untouchability. The pity of the matter 
is that most people condemn slavery simply because they hold that for 
one man or class to have by law the power of life and death over another 
is wrong. They forget that there can be cruel oppression, tyranny, and 
persecution, with the train of misery, disappointment and desperation 
even when there is no slavery. Those who will take note of the facts 
stated above relating to the de facto condition of the slaves will admit 
that it is idle to condemn slavery lightly or hurriedly on the mere de 
jure conception of it. What the law permits is not always evidence of the 
practices prevalent in society. Many a slave would readily have admitted 
that they owed everything to slavery, and many did so whether they 
would have admitted it or not. 

Slavery, it must be admitted, is not a free social order. But can 
untouchability be described as a free social order? The Hindus who 
came forward to defend untouchability no doubt claim that it is. They, 
however, forget that there are differences between untouchability and 
slavery which makes untouchability a worse type of an unfree social 
order. Slavery was never obligatory. But untouchability is obligatory. A 
person is permitted to hold another as his slave. There is no compulsion 
on him if he does not want to. But an Untouchable has no option. Once 
he is born an Untouchable, he is subject to all the disabilities of an 
Untouchable. The law of slavery permitted emancipation. Once a slave 
always a slave was not the fate of the slave. In untouchability there 
is no escape. Once an Untouchable always an Untouchable. The other 
difference is that untouchability is an indirect and therefore the worst 
form of slavery. A deprivation of a man’s freedom by an open and direct 
way is a preferable form of enslavement. It makes the slave conscious 
of his enslavement and to become conscious of slavery is the first and 
most important step in the battle for freedom. But if a man is deprived 
of his liberty indirectly he has no consciousness of his enslavement. 
Untouchability is an indirect form of slavery. To tell an Untouchable 
‘you are free, you are a citizen, you have all the rights of a citizen’, and 
to tighten the rope in such a way as to leave him no opportunity to 
realize the ideal is a cruel deception. It is enslavement without making 
the Untouchables conscious of their enslavement. It is slavery though it 
is untouchability. It is real though it is indirect. It is enduring because 
it is unconscious. Of the two orders, untouchability is beyond doubt the 


worse. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


16 


16 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Neither slavery nor untouchability is a free social order. But if a 
distinction is to be made — and there is no doubt that there is distinction 
between the two — the test is whether education, virtue, happiness, 
culture, and wealth is possible within slavery or within untouchability. 
Judged by this test it is beyond controversy that slavery is hundred 
times better than untouchability. In slavery there is room for education, 
virtue, happiness, culture, or wealth. In untouchability there is none. 
Untouchability has none of the advantages of an unfree social order such 
as slavery. It has all the disadvantages of a free social order. In an unfree 
social order such as slavery there is the advantage of apprenticeship in 
a business, craft or art or what Prof. Mures calls ‘an initiation into a 
higher culture’. Neither the crushing of untouchability nor the refusal of 
personal growth was necessary inherent in slavery, especially slavery as 
it existed in Roman Empire. It is therefore overhasty to say that slavery 
is better than untouchability. 

This training, this initiation of culture was undoubtedly a great 
benefit to the slave. Equally it involved considerable cost to the master 
to train his slave, to initiate him into culture. ‘There can have been 
little supply of slaves educated or trained before enslavement. The 
alternative was to train them when young slaves in domestic work or in 
skilled craft, as was indeed done to some extent before the Empire, by 
Cato, the Elder, for example. The training was done by his owner and 
his existing staff.... indeed the household of the rich contained special 
pedagogue for this purpose. Such training took many forms, industry, 
trade, arts and letters’. 

The reason why the master took so much trouble to train the slave 
and to initiate him in the higher forms of labour and culture was 
undoubtedly the motive of gain. A skilled slave as an item was more 
valuable than an unskilled slave. If sold, he would fetch better price, if 
hired out he would bring in more wages. It was therefore an investment 
to the owner to train his slave. 

In an unfree social order, such as slavery, the duty to maintain 
the slave in life and the body falls upon the master. The slave was 
relieved of all responsibility in respect of his food, his clothes and his 
shelter. All this, the master was bound to provide. This was, of course, 
no burden because the slave earned more than his keep. But a security 
for boarding and lodging is not always possible for every freeman as 
all wage-earners now know to their cost. Work is not always available 
even to those who are ready to toil and a workman cannot escape the 
rule according to which he gets no bread if he finds no work. This 
rule — no work no bread — has no applicability to the slave. It is the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


17 


SLAVES AND UNTOUCHABLES 17 

duty of the master to find bread and also to find work. If the master 
fails to find work, the slave does not forfeit his right to bread. The 
ebbs and tides of business, the booms and depressions are vicissitudes 
through which all free wage-earners have to go. But they do not affect 
the slave. They may affect his master. But the slave is free from them. 
He gets his bread, perhaps the same bread, but bread whether it is 
boom or whether it is depression. 

In an unfree social order, such as slavery, the master is bound to 
take great care of the health and well-being of the slave. The slave was 
property of the master. But this very disadvantage gave the slave an 
advantage over a freeman. Being property and therefore valuable, the 
master for sheer self-interest took great care of the health and well- 
being of the slave. In Rome, the slaves were never employed on marshy 
and malarial land. On such a land only freemen were employed. Cato 
advises Roman farmers never to employ slaves on marshy and malarial 
land. This seems strange. But a little examination will show that this 
was quite natural. Slave was valuable property and as such a prudent 
man who knows his interest will not expose his valuable possession to 
the ravages of malaria. The same care need not be taken in the case of 
freeman because he is not valuable property. This consideration resulted 
into the great advantage of the slave. He was cared for as no one was. 

Untouchability has none of the three advantages of the unfree social 
order mentioned above. The Untouchable has no entry in the higher 
arts of civilization and no way open to a life of culture. He must only 
sweep. He must do nothing else. Untouchability carries no security as to 
livelihood. None from the Hindus is responsible for the feeding, housing 
and clothing of the Untouchable. The health of the Untouchable is the 
care of nobody. Indeed, the death of an Untouchable is regarded as a 
good riddance. There is a Hindu proverb which says ‘The Untouchable 
is dead and the fear of pollution has vanished’. 

On the other hand, untouchability has all the disadvantages of a 
free social order. In a free social order the responsibility for survival 
in the struggle for existence lies on the individual. This responsibility 
is one of the greatest disadvantages of a free social order. Whether an 
individual is able to carry out this responsibility depends upon fair 
start, equal opportunity and square deal. The Untouchable, while he 
is a free individual, had neither fair start, nor equal opportunity nor 
square deal. From this point of view, untouchability is not only worse 
than slavery but is positively cruel as compared to slavery. In slavery, 
the master has the obligation to find work for the slave. In a system of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


18 


18 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

free labour workers have to compete with workers for obtaining work. 
In this scramble for work what chances has the Untouchable for a 
fair deal ? To put it shortly, in this competition with the scales always 
weighing against him by reason of his social stigma he is the last to be 
employed and the first to be fired. Untouchability is cruelty as compared 
to slavery because it throws upon the Untouchables the responsibility 
for maintaining himself without opening to him fully all the ways of 
earning a living. 

To sum up, the Untouchables unlike the slaves are owned by the 
Hindus for purposes which further their interests and are disowned by 
them, when owning them places them under burden. The Untouchables 
can claim none of the advantages of an unfree social order and are left 
to bear all the disadvantages of a free social order. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


19 


Chapter 4 

THE INDIAN GHETTO— THE CENTRE 
OF UNTOU CHABILITY — 

Outside the Fold 

What is the position of the Untouchables under the Hindu social order? 
To give a true idea of their position is the main purpose of this chapter. 
But it is not easy to strike upon the best means of conveying a realistic 
and concrete picture of the way the Untouchables live or rather are 
made to live under the Hindu social order to one who has no conception 
of it. One way is to draw a model plant so to say of the Hindu social 
order and show the place given to the Untouchables therein. For this 
it is necessary to go to a Hindu village. Nothing can serve our purpose 
better. The Hindu village is a working plant of the Hindu social order. 
One can see there the Hindu social order in operation in full swing. The 
average Hindu is always in ecstasy whenever he speaks of the Indian 
village. He regards it as an ideal form of social organization to which 
he believes there is no parallel anywhere in the world. It is claimed to 
be a special contribution to the theory of social organization for which 
India may well be proud of. 

How fanatic are the Hindus in their belief in the Indian village as an 
ideal piece of social organisation may be seen from the angry speeches 
made by the Hindu members of the Indian Constituent Assembly in 
support of the contention that the Indian Constitution should recognize 
the Indian village as its base of the constitutional pyramid of autonomous 
administrative units with its own legislature, executive and judiciary. 
From the point of view of the Untouchables, there could not have been 
a greater calamity. Thank God the Constituent Assembly did not adopt 
it. Nevertheless the Hindus persist in their belief that the Indian village 
is an ideal form of social organization. This belief of the Hindus is not 
ancestral belief, nor does it come from the ancient past. It is borrowed 
from Sir Charles Metcalfe — a civil servant of the East India Company. 
Metcalfe, who was a revenue officer, in one of his Revenue Papers 
described the Indian village in the following terms 1 : 

“The village communities are little republics, having nearly 
everything they want within themselves and almost independent of 

1 Quoted by Baden Powell in his “Land System of British India” — Vol. I. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


20 


20 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

any foreign relations. They seem to last when nothing else lasts. 
Dynasty after dynasty tumbles down, revolution succeeds to 
revolution; Hindu, Pathan, Moghul, Maratha, Sikh, English, all are 
masters in turn, but the village communities remain the same. In 
times of trouble they arm and fortify themselves. An hostile army 
passes through the country, the village communities collect their 
cattle within their walls and let the enemy pass unprovoked. If 
plunder and devastation be directed against themselves, and the forces 
employed be irresistible, they flee to friendly villages at a distance; 
but when the storm has passed over, they return and resume their 
occupations. If a country remains for a series of years the scene 
of continued pillage and massacre so that the villages cannot be 
inhabited, the scattered villagers nevertheless return whenever the 
power of peaceable possession revives. A generation may pass away, 
but the succeeding generation will return. The sons will take the place 
of their fathers; the same site for the village, the same position for 
their houses, the same lands will be reoccupied by the descendants 
of those who were driven out when the village was repopulated; and 
it is not a trifling matter that will drive them out, for they will often 
maintain their post through times of disturbances and convulsion, 
and acquire strength sufficient to resist pillage and oppression with 
success. This union of the village communities, each one forming 
a little state in itself, has, I conceive, contributed more than any 
other cause to the preservation of the people of India, through all 
the revolutions and changes which they have referred, and is in a 
high degree conducive to their happiness and to the enjoyment of 
a great portion of freedom and independence.” 

Having read this description of an Indian village given by a high- 
placed member of the governing class, the Hindus felt flattered and 
adopted his view as a welcome compliment. In adopting this view 
of the Indian village, the Hindus have not done any justice to their 
intelligence or their understanding. They have merely exhibited the 
weakness common to all subject people. Since many foreigners are 
led to accept this idealistic view of the Indian village, it would be 
better to present a realistic picture of the Society as one finds it in 
an Indian village. 

The Indian village is not a single social unit. It consists of castes. 
But for our purposes, it is enough to say — 

I. The population in the village is divided into two sections — (i) 
Touchables and («) Untouchables. 

II. The Touchables form the major community and the Untouchables 
a minor community. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


21 


OUTSIDE THE FOLD 21 

III. The Touchables live inside the village and the Untouchables live 
outside the village in separate quarters. 

IV. Economically, the Touchables form a strong and powerful community, 
while the Untouchables are a poor and a dependent community. 

V. Socially, the Touchables occupy the position of a ruling race, while 
the Untouchables occupy the position of a subject race of hereditary 
bondsmen. 

What are the terms of associated life on which the Touchables and 
Untouchables live in an Indian village? In every village the Touchables 
have a code which the Untouchables are required to follow. This code lays 
down the acts of omissions and commissions which the Touchables treat as 
offences. The following is the list of such offences: 

1. The Untouchables must live in separate quarters away from the 
habitation of the Hindus. It is an offence for the Untouchables to 
break or evade the rule of segregation. 

2. The quarters of the Untouchables must be located towards the South, 
since the South is the most inauspicious of the four directions. A 
breach of this rule shall be deemed to be an offence. 

3. The Untouchable must observe the rule of distance pollution or shadow 
of pollution as the case may be. It is an offence to break the rule. 

4. It is an offence for a member of the Untouchable community to acquire 
wealth, such as land or cattle. 

5. It is an offence for a member of the Untouchable community to build 
a house with tiled roof. 

6. It is an offence for a member of an Untouchable community to put 
on a clean dress, wear shoes, put on a watch or gold ornaments. 

7. It is an offence for a member of the Untouchable community to give 
high sounding names to their children. Their names be such as to 
indicate contempt. 

8. It is an offence for a member of the Untouchable community to sit 
on a chair in the presence of a Hindu. 

9. It is an offence for a member of the Untouchable community to ride 
on a horse or a palanquin through the village. 

10. It is an offence for a member of the Untouchable community to take 
a procession of Untouchables through the village. 

11. It is an offence for a member of the Untouchable community not to 
salute a Hindu. 

12. It is an offence for a member of the Untouchable community to speak 
a cultured language. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


22 


22 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

13. It is an offence for a member of the Untouchable community, if he 
happens to come into the village on a sacred day which the Hindus treat 
as the day of fast and at or about the time of the breaking of fast; to go 
about speaking, on the ground that their breath is held to foul the air and 
the food of the Hindus. 

14. It is an offence for an Untouchable to wear the outward marks of a 
Touchable and pass himself as a Touchable. 

15. An Untouchable must conform to the status of an inferior and he 
must wear the marks of his inferiority for the public to know and identify 
him such as — 

(a) having a contemptible name. 

( b ) not wearing clean clothes. 

(c) not having tiled roof. 

(i d ) not wearing silver and gold ornaments. 

A contravention of any of these rules is an offence. 

Next come the duties which the Code requires members of the Untouchable 
community to perform for the Touchables. Under this head the following 
may be mentioned: 

1. A member of an Untouchable community must carry a message of 
any event in the house of a Hindu such as death or marriage to his 
relatives living in other villages no matter how distant these villages 
may be. 

2. An Untouchable must work at the house of a Hindu when a marriage 
is taking place, such as breaking fuel, and going on errands. 

3. An Untouchable must accompany a Hindu girl when she is going from 
her parent’s house to her husband’s village no matter how distant it 
is. 

4. When the whole village community is engaged in celebrating a general 
festivity such as Holi or Dasara, the Untouchables must perform all 
menial acts which are preliminary to the main observance. 

5. On certain festivities, the Untouchables must submit their women to 
members of the village community to be made the subject of indecent 
fun. 

These duties have to be performed without remuneration. 

To realise the significance of these duties, it is important to note why 
they have come into being. Every Hindu in the village regards himself 
as a superior person above the Untouchables. As an overlord, he feels 
it absolutely essential to maintain his prestige. This prestige he cannot 
maintain unless he has at his command a retinue to dance attendance 
on him. It is in the Untouchable that he finds a ready retinue which is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


23 


OUTSIDE THE FOLD 23 

at his command and for which he does not have to pay. The Untouchables 
by reason of their helplessness cannot refuse to perform these duties 
and the Hindu villager does not hesitate to exact them since they are 
so essential to the maintenance of his prestige. 

These offences are not to be found in the Penal Code, enacted 
by the British Government. Nonetheless so far as the Untouchables 
are concerned, they are real. A breach of any of them involves sure 
punishment for the Untouchables. How they are enforced will be clear 
from Chapter 5 & 6. 

Another important thing to note is that the punishment for these 
offences is always collective. The whole community of Untouchables is 
liable for punishment though the offence may have been committed by 
an individual. 

How do the Untouchables live? How do they earn their living? Without 
a knowledge of the ways of earning a livelihood which are open to the 
Untouchables it would not be possible to have a clear idea of their place 
in the Hindu Society. 

In an agricultural country, agriculture can be the main source of 
living. But this source of earning a living is generally not open to the 
Untouchables. This is so for a variety of reasons. In the first place purchase 
of land is beyond their means. Secondly even if an Untouchable has the 
money to purchase land he has no opportunity to do so. In most parts 
the Hindus would resent an Untouchable coming forward to purchase 
land and thereby trying to become the equal of the Touchable class of 
Hindus. Such an act of daring on the part of an Untouchable would 
not only be frowned upon but might easily invite punishment. In some 
parts they are disabled by law from purchasing land. For instance in 
the Province of Punjab there is a law called the Land Alienation Act. 
This law specifies the communities which can purchase land and the 
Untouchables are excluded from the list. The result is that in most part 
the Untouchables are forced to be landless labourers. As labourers they 
cannot demand reasonable wages. They have to work for the Hindu 
farmer for such wages as their masters choose to give. On this issue the 
Hindu farmers can combine to keep the wages to the lowest level possible 
for it is to their interests to do so. On the other hand the Untouchables 
have no holding power. They must earn or starve. Nor have they any 
bargaining power. They must submit to the rate fixed or suffer violence. 

The wages paid to the Untouchables are either paid in cash or in 
corn. In parts of the Uttar Pradesh the corn given to the Untouchables 
as their wages is called “Gobaraha” . “Gobaraha” means privy corn or 
corn contained in the dung of an animal. In the month of March or 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


24 


24 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

April when the crop is fully grown, reaped and dried, it is spread on 
the threshing floor. Bullocks are made to tread over the corn in order 
to take the corn out of husk by the pressure of their hooves. While 
treading over the corn, the bullocks swallow up the corn as well as the 
straw. As their intake is excessive they find it difficult to digest the 
corn. Next day, the same corn comes out of their stomach along with 
their dung. The dung is strained and the corn is separated and given to 
the Untouchable workmen as their wages which they convert into flour 
and make into bread. 

When the agricultural season is over the Untouchables have no 
employment and no means of earning a living. In such seasons they 
subsist by cutting grass and firewood from the jungle and sell it in a 
nearby town. Even when it is open it depends upon the forest guard. 
Only if he is bribed he will let them take some grass and firewood from 
the Government forest. When it is brought to the town they have always 
to face a buyer’s market. The Hindus who are the main body of buyers 
will always conspire to beat down the wages. Having no power to hold 
out, the Untouchables have to sell their stuff for whatever is offered to 
them. Often times they have to walk 10 miles each way from the village 
to the town and back to sell their stuff. 

There is no trade in which they are engaged themselves as a means 
of earning a livelihood. They have not the capital for it and even if they 
had, no one would buy from them. 

All these sources of earning are obviously precarious and fleeting. 
There is no security. There is only one secure source of livelihood open 
to the Untouchables in some parts of the country known to me. It is the 
right to beg food from the Hindu farmers of the village. Every village 
has its machinery of administration. The Untouchables of the village are 
hereditary menials employed in the village administration. As part of 
their remuneration the whole body of Untouchables get a small parcel of 
land assigned in the ancient past which is fixed and is never increased 
and which the Untouchables prefer to leave uncultivated because of its 
excessive fragmentations. Coupled with this is given to them the right 
to beg for food. 

Shocking as it may seem, this has become a customary right of the 
Untouchables and even Government takes into account the value of the 
food obtained by the Untouchables by begging in fixing the remuneration 
of an Untouchable if he were to be employed in Government job. 

This right to beg for food from the Touchables is now the principal 
means of livelihood for 60 millions of Untouchables in India. If anyone 
were to move in a village after the usual dinner time, he will meet with 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


25 


OUTSIDE THE FOLD 25 

a swarm of Untouchables moving about the village begging for food and 
uttering the formula. 

This statutory beggary as a means of livelihood for the Untouchables 
has been reduced to a system. The Untouchable families are attached to 
different Touchable families in the village as did the serfs and villeins to 
the Lords of the Manors in Medieval Europe. The Untouchable families 
attached to the Touchable families are at the command of the latter. This 
relationship has become so personal that one always hears a Touchable 
speaking of an Untouchable as ‘my man’ as though he was his slave. 
This relationship has helped to systematize this matter of begging food 
by the Untouchables from the Touchable households. 

This is the Village Republic of which the Hindus are so proud. 
What is the position of the Untouchables in this Republic? They are not 
merely the last but are also the least. He is stamped as an inferior and 
is held down to that status by all ways and means which a majority 
can command. This inferiority is the destiny not merely of an individual 
but of the whole class. All Untouchables are inferior to all Touchables 
irrespective of age or qualification. A Touchable youth is above an aged 
Untouchable and an educated Untouchable must rank below an illiterate 
Touchable. 

The established order is the law made by the Touchables. The 
Untouchables have nothing to do with it except to obey it and respect it. 

The Untouchables have no rights against the Touchables. For them 
there is no equal right, no justice by which that which is due to the 
Untouchables is allowed to them. Nothing is due to them except what 
the Touchables are prepared to grant. The Untouchables must not insist 
on rights. They should pray for mercy and favour and rest content with 
what is offered. 

This established order is a hereditary order both in status as well as 
in function. Once a Touchable, always a Touchable. Once an Untouchable, 
always an Untouchable. Once a Brahmin, always a Brahmin. Once a 
sweeper, always a sweeper. Under it, those who are born high, remain 
high; those who are born low, remain low. In other words, the established 
order is based on an inexorable law of karma or destiny which is fixed 
once for all and can never be changed. This destiny has no relation to 
the merits of the individuals living under it. An Untouchable however 
superior he may be mentally and morally, is below a Touchable in rank, 
no matter how inferior he may be mentally or morally. A Touchable 
however poor he may be, must always take rank above an Untouchable, 
however rich he may be. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


26 


26 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Such is the picture of the inside life in an Indian village. In this 
Republic, there is no place for democracy. There is no room for equality. 
There is no room for liberty and there is no room for fraternity. The 
Indian village is the very negation of a Republic. If it is a republic, it is 
a republic of the Touchables, by the Touchables and for the Touchables. 
The republic is an Empire of the Hindus over the Untouchables. It is a 
kind of colonialism of the Hindus designed to exploit the Untouchables. 
The Untouchables have no rights. They are there only to wait, serve 
and submit. They are there to do or to die. They have no rights because 
they are outside the village republic and because they are outside the 
so-called republic, they are outside the Hindu fold. This is a vicious 
circle. But this is a fact which cannot be gainsaid. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


27 


CHAPTER 5 

UNFIT FOR HUMAN ASSOCIATION 

The Untouchables as explained in the last Chapter are outside the 
Hindu fold. The question however remains: How far removed are they 
from the Hindus? What respect, what consideration do the Hindus 
show to them as human beings if not as Hindus? Without an answer 
to these questions, one cannot get a complete picture of the life of the 
Untouchables. The answer is there for anyone who cares to note it. The 
only difficulty is how to present it. There are two ways of presenting it. 
Either in the form of a statement or by citation of cases. I will adopt 
the latter. I do not wish to weary the reader with many cases. I will 
cite only a few which are quite telling. 

The first case is from the State of Madras. 

In the year 1909 an appeal was filed in the Madras High Court by 
Mr. Venkata Subba Reddy and others all of whom were Hindus against 
their conviction by the Magistrate under section 339, Indian Penal Code, 
for causing obstruction to the complainant and his party who were also 
caste Hindus. The judgment 1 of the Madras High Court which gives the 
facts of the case and illustrates the position of the Untouchables vis-a-vis 
the Hindus in a very striking manner. The judgment is therefore worth 
quoting. It is as follows: 

“The Appellants (Venkata Subba Reddy and others) have been 
convicted of wrongful restraint for having caused certain Pariahs 2 
to stand in the public street in the vicinity of a temple with the 
object of preventing the complainant from conducting a procession 
from the temple through the street. It is found that the complainant, 
deterred by fear of the pollution which he would have suffered had 
he passed near the Pariahs, did not conduct the procession, and that 
the accused maliciously caused the Pariahs to take up their positions 
in the street with the sole object of deterring the complainant from 
going where he had a right to go. 

We do not think that the accused have committed the offence 
of wrongful restraint; in our opinion this act did not amount to 

1 It is reported in 11 Criminal Law Journal, p. 263. 

2 The Pariahs are an Untouchable community in Madras. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


28 


28 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

an obstruction within the meaning of section 339. The Pariahs were 
no obstruction; in fact there was nothing to prevent the complainant 
from taking his procession past them and they had a right to be 
where they were; and it is not suggested that their presence was 
intended to cause fear of physical injury or any fear that anything 
would happen to the complainant except the pollution of the procession 
by their presence. 

It was not the presence of the Pariahs but the complainant’s 
own disinclination to go near them which prevented him from going 
where he would; it was his own choice which kept him from leaving 
the temple as Mr. Kuppuswami Aiyer put it, it was with his own 
consent that he remained there and there was no fear of injury 
within the meaning of the Penal Code which would prevent that 
consent from being a free consent. If it were otherwise, it would 
follow that a person in the position of the complainant would be 
justified in complaining of wrongful restraint against any Pariah, 
who having been lawfully in the public street on his own business, 
refused to move when directed to remove himself to a distance, 
knowing that if he remained, the complainant would be deterred 
by fear of pollution from passing near him. 

It is clear that there would be no wrongful restraint in such a 
case and we think, it makes no difference that the Pariahs were 
posted by the accused 1 . 

We therefore set aside the conviction and sentence and direct 
refund of the fines if paid.” 

The case is very illuminating. There were in this case two parties. 
Venkata Subba Reddy was the leader of one party. Both parties were 
caste Hindus. The quarrel between the parties was over the right 
to take out a procession. Venkata Subba Reddy wanted to stop his 
opponents from taking out a procession and did not know how best 
to do it. It struck him that the effective way would be to get a few 
Untouchables and ask them to stand on the road and hold fast to it. 
The trick succeeded and his opponents could not dare to go in the 
procession for fear of being polluted. The fact that the Madras High 
Court gave a judgment to the effect that making the Pariahs stand 
on the road does not constitute obstruction in the legal sense of the 
term is another matter. The fact remains that the mere presence of 
the Pariahs was enough to drive the Hindus away. What does this 
mean? It means that the Hindus have an absolute feeling of revulsion 
towards the Untouchables. 

1 The trial Magistrate had held that the posting of the Pariahs was enough to cause 
obstruction and had held the accused guilty. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


29 


UNFIT FOR HUMAN ASSOCIATION 29 

The next case is equally illuminating. It is a case of an Untouchable 
school teacher in a village in Kathiavar and is reported in the following 
letter which appeared in the ‘Young India’ a journal published by Mr. 
Gandhi in its issue of 12th December 1929. It expresses the difficulties 
he had expressed in persuading a Hindu doctor to attend to his wife who 
had just delivered and how the wife and child died for want of medical 
attention. The letter says: 

“On the 5th of this month a child was born to me. On the 7th, 
she fell ill and suffered from loose stools. Her vitality seemed to ebb 
away and her chest became inflamed. Her breathing became difficult 
and there was acute pain in the ribs. I went to call doctor — but he 
said he would not go to the house of a Harijan nor was he prepared 
to examine the child. Then I went to Nagarseth and Garasia Darbar 
and pleaded them to help me. The Nagarseth stood surety to the 
doctor for my paying his fee of two rupees. Then the doctor came but 
on condition that he would examine them only outside the Harijan 
colony. I took my wife out of the colony along with her newly born 
child. Then the doctor gave his thermometer to a Muslim, he gave 
it to me and I gave it to my wife and then returned it by the same 
process after it had been applied. It was about eight o’clock in the 
evening and the doctor on looking at the thermometer in the light 
of a lamp said that the patient was suffering from pneumonia. Then 
the doctor went away and sent the medicine. I brought some linseed 
from the bazaar and used it on the patient. The doctor refused to 
see her later, although I gave the two rupees fee. The disease is 
dangerous and God alone will help us. 

The lamp of my life has died out. She passed away at about two 
o’clock this afternoon.” 

The name of the Untouchable school teacher is not given. So also 
the name of the doctor is not mentioned. This was at the request of the 
Untouchable teacher who feared reprisals. The facts are indisputable. 

No explanation is necessary. The doctor, who in spite of being educated 
refused to apply the thermometer and treat an ailing woman in a critical 
condition. As a result of his refusal to treat her, the woman died. He 
felt no qualms of conscience in setting aside the code of conduct which 
is binding on his profession. The Hindu would prefer to be inhuman 
rather than touch an Untouchable. 

The third case is taken from ‘Prakash’ of 23rd August 1932: 

“In the village of Jagwal, tahsil Jafarwal on the 6th August, a 
calf fell into a well. Rammahashaya, a Dom 1 by caste was standing 
nearby. He at once jumped into the well and caught the calf in his 
arms. On three or four men coming to help, the calf was safely 
1 Dom is an Untouchable community of U.P. and Bihar. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


30 


30 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


rescued from the well. The Hindus of the village, however, raised a 
hue and cry that their well had been defiled and victimised the poor 
man. Fortunately, a barrister had come to the scene. He soundly 
rebuked the men who were tormenting Sadhuram and thus brought 
them to their senses. Thus, the man’s life was saved otherwise no 
one knows what might have happened.” 

What is important: saving of the calf by the Untouchable and his 
polluting the well or the death of the calf and saving the well from being 
polluted by the Untouchable? From the point of view of the Hindus, it 
would be better if the calf had died than an Untouchable even for the 
purpose of saving the calf should have polluted the well. 

Another case of similar sort is reported in the ‘ Bombay Samachar’ 
of 19th December 1936: 

“ In Kaladi, a village of Calicut, the child of a young woman 
fell into a well. The woman raised an alarm but none present dared 
to go down the well. A stranger who was passing by jumped into 
the well and rescued the child. Later, when the people asked the 
benefactor who he was, he said, he was an Untouchable. Thereupon 
instead of being thankful, the man was fully abused and assaulted 
as he had polluted the well.” 

How unclean and unfit for association an Untouchable is to a Hindu 
be evident from the following incident reported in the ‘ Adi Hindu of 
Lucknow for July 1937: It says: 

“An employee of the Madras Holmes Company, who claimed 
to be one of the high caste persons, passed away recently. When 
at the cremation ground his pyre was set fire to, his friends and 
kinsmen threw rice on it. Among these friends unfortunately there 
was an Untouchable, an Adi-Dravida of Madras. He also joined in 
the throwing of the rice. At this, the high caste Hindus rebuked 
him for defiling the pyre. This led on to a heated argument and 
the upshot was that two men were stabbed in the stomach, one of 
them died at once upon reaching the hospital and the condition of 
the other one is said to be critical.” 

There is one other incident more telling than this. On the 6th of 
March 1938, a meeting of the Bhangis was held at Kasarwadi (behind 
Woollen Mills) Dadar, Bombay, under the Chairmanship of Mr. Indulal 
Yadnik. In this meeting, one Bhangi boy narrated his experience in the 
following terms: 

“I passed the Vernacular Final Examination in 1933. I have 
studied English up to the 4th Standard. I applied to the Schools 
Committee of the Bombay Municipality for employment as a 
teacher but I failed as there was no vacancy. Then, I applied to the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


31 


UNFIT FOR HUMAN ASSOCIATION 31 

Backward Classes Officer, Ahmedabad, for the job of a Talati 
(village Patwari) and I succeeded. On 19th February 1936, I was 
appointed a Talati in the office of the Mamlatdar of the Borsad 
Taluka in the Kheda District 

Although my family originally came from Gujarat, I had never 
been in Gujarat before. This was my first occasion to go there. 
Similarly, I did not know that untouchability would be observed 
in Government offices. Besides in my application the fact of 
my being a Harijan was mentioned and so I expected that my 
colleagues in the office would know before hand who I was That 
being so, I was surprised to find the attitude of the clerk of the 
Mamlatdar’s office when I presented myself to take charge of the 
post of the Talati. 

The Karkun contemptuously asked, “Who are you?” I replied, 
“Sir, I am a Harijan”; He said, ‘Go away, stand at a distance. 
How dare you stand so near me. You are in office, if you were 
outside I would have given you six kicks, what audacity to come 
here for service!” Thereafter, he asked me to drop on the ground 
my certificate and the order of appointment as a Talati. He then 
picked them up. While I was working in the Mamlatdar’s office 
at Borsad I experienced great difficulty in the matter of getting 
water for drinking. In the verandah of the office there were kept 
cans containing drinking water. There was a waterman incharge 
of these water cans. His duty was to pour out water to clerks in 
office whenever they needed it. In the absence of the waterman 
they could themselves take water out of the cans and drink it. 
That was impossible in my case. I could not touch the cans for 
my touch would pollute the water, I had therefore to depend upon 
the mercy of the waterman. For my use there was kept a small 
rusty pot. No one would touch it or wash it except myself. It was 
in this pot that the waterman would dole out water to me. But I 
could get water only if the waterman was present. This waterman 
did not like the idea of supplying me with water. Seeing that I 
was coming for water he would manage to slip away with the 
result that I had to go without water and the days on which I 
had no water to drink were by no means few. 

I had the same difficulties regarding my residence. I was a 
stranger in Borsad. No caste Hindu would rent a house to me. The 
Untouchables of Borsad were not ready to give me lodgings for the 
fear of displeasing the Hindus who did not like my attempt to live 
as a clerk, a station above me. Far greater difficulties were with 
regard to food. There was no place or person from where I could get 
my meals. I used to buy ‘Bhajhas’ morning and evening, eat them in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


32 


32 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

some solitary place outside the village and come and sleep at night, 
on the pavement of the verandahs of the Mamlatdar’s office. In 
this way, I passed four days. All this became unbearable to me. 
Then I went to live at Jentral, my ancestral village. It was six 
miles from Borsad. Every day I had to walk eleven miles. This I 
did for a month and a half. 

Thereafter the Mamlatdar sent me to a Talati to learn the 
work. This Talati was in charge of three villages, Jentral, Khapur 
and Saijpur. Jentral was his headquarters. I was in Jentral with 
this Talati for two months. He taught me nothing and I never 
once entered the village office. The headman of the village was 
particularly hostile. Once he had said ‘ you fellow, your father, 
your brother are sweepers who sweep the village office and you 
want to sit in the office as our equal? Take care, better give up 
this job.’ 

One day the Talati called me to Saijpur to prepare the 
population table of the village. From Jentral I went to Saijpur. 
I found the Headman and the Talati in the village office doing 
some work. I went, stood near the door of the office and wished 
them ‘good morning’ but they took no notice of me. I stood outside 
for about 15 minutes. I was already tired of life and felt enraged 
at being thus ignored and insulted. I sat down on a chair that 
was lying there. Seeing me seated on the chair the Headman and 
the Talati quietly went away without saying anything to me. A 
short while after, people began to come and soon a large crowd 
gathered round me. This crowd was led by the Librarian of the 
village library. I could not understand why an educated person 
should have led this mob. I subsequently learnt that the chair 
was his. He started abusing me in the worst terms. Addressing 
the Ravania (village servant) he said ‘who allowed this dirty-dog 
of a Bhangi to sit on the chair?’ The Ravania unseated me and 
took away the chair from me. I sat on the ground. Thereupon 
the crowd entered the village office and surrounded me. It was 
a furious crowd raging with anger, some abusing me, some 
threatening to cut me to pieces with Dharya (a sharp weapon 
like the sword). I implored them to excuse me and to have mercy 
upon me. That did not have any effect upon the crowd. I did not 
know how to save myself. But an idea came to me of writing to 
the Mamlatdar about the fate that had befallen me and telling 
him how to dispose of my body in case I was killed by the crowd. 
Incidentally, it was my hope that if the crowd came to know that 
I was practically reporting against them to the Mamlatdar they 
might hold their hands. I asked the Ravania to give me a piece of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


33 


UNFIT FOR HUMAN ASSOCIATION 


33 


paper which he did. Then with my fountain pen I wrote the following 
on it in big bold letters so that everybody could read it: 

“To 

The Mamlatdar, Taluk Borsad. 

Sir, 

Be pleased to accept the humble salutations of Parmar Kalidas 
Shivram. This is to humbly inform you that the hand of death is 
falling upon me today. It would not have been so if I had listened 
to the words of my parents. Be so good as to inform my parents of 
my death.” 

The Librarian read what I wrote and at once asked me to tear 
it off, which 1 did. They showered upon me innumerable insults. 
‘You want us to address you as our Talati? You are a Bhangi and 
you want to enter the office and sit on the chair? I implored for 
mercy and promised not to repeat this and also promised to give up 
the job. I was kept there till seven in the evening when the crowd 
left. Till then the Talati and the Mukhiya had not come. Thereafter 
I took fifteen days’ leave and returned to my parents in Bombay.” 

There is another facet of the social outlook of the Hindus towards the 
Untouchables which cannot be neglected. This outlook is best illustrated 
by a study of the following cases. In the ‘Alfzal of 8th September 1943: 

“It was reported from Nasik on 1st September that the Hindus of 
a village attacked an Achchut family; tied the hands and feet of an 
elderly woman, placed her on a pile of wood which was subsequently 
set on fire. All this because they thought she was the cause of the 
Cholera in the village.” 

The ‘ Times of India’ of August 29, 1946. 

“The Harijan quarters of a village in Kaira District are reported 
to have been raided by Caste Hindus on suspicion that the Harijans 
were causing the death of cattle by witchcraft. 

It is alleged that about 200 villagers armed with sticks raided 
the Harijan quarters and tying an old woman to a tree, burnt her 
feet. Another woman is reported to have been belaboured. 

The Harijans evacuated the village in panic, but Mr. Chhotabhai 
Patel, Secretary of the District Harijan Sevak Sangh who was apprized 
of the incidents has brought back the Harijans to the village and 
applied to the authorities for their protection. 

A similar incident is reported from another village, where Harijans 
are alleged to have been severely belaboured.” 

The matter did not end there. There was a recurrence of violence 
in which the whole body of Hindus are reported to have taken part in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


34 


34 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

general assault on the Untouchables. The news appeared in the ‘ Bharat 
Jyoti’ of 22nd September 1946 which is reproduced below: 

“Five Harijans, including one woman, were injured seriously 
when a crowd of villagers attacked them with dhahas and lathis in 
a village in Borsad Taluka in Kaira District according to a report 
received by the Secretary of the Borsad Taluka Harijan Sevak Sangh. 

The attack was a sequel to the death of about seven buffaloes which 
the villagers attributed to black-magic practised by the Harijans. 

The injured have been sent to hospital. Police rushed to the 
spot, and some persons have been arrested. 

The villagers, it is learnt, are threatening the Harijans that if they 
make any complaints to the authorities they would be burnt alive. 

Such incidents often occur in Kaira villages, and the District 
Magistrate of Kaira has instructed all police and other executive 
officers to take strong measures against such harassment of Harijans.” 

The tale told by these cases is clear and simple. No comment is 
necessary. To the average Hindu, the Untouchable is not fit even for 
human association. He is the carrier of evil. He is not a human being. 
He must be shunned. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


35 


PART II 

Chapter 6 

UNTOUCHABILITY AND 
LAWLESSNESS 


There are many people who must be wondering as to how such an 
established order so full of inequalities could have survived. What are 
the forces which go to support it? Of the forces which sustain the system 
the most important is the determination of the Hindus to maintain it at 
all cost. The Hindus are prepared to use every means to suppress the 
Untouchables whenever the Untouchables try to upset it even in the 
slightest degree. The ordinary non-violent Hindu will not hesitate to use 
the utmost violence against the Untouchables. There is no cruelty which 
he will not practice against them to sustain the established order. Not 
many will readily believe this. But this is a fact. For those who have 
any doubt on the point, I reproduce below some cases of tyrannies and 
oppressions practised by the Hindus against the Untouchables as have 
been reported from time to time in the newspapers: 

I 

The following news item appeared in the “Tej” of Delhi in its issue 
of 4th September 1927: 

“The Shiv Temple of Vykom has been desecrated by the Harijans 
by their coming too near to the temple. Now the Hindus of that area 
have decided that the ceremony of purifying the temple should be 
elaborately performed at great expense before the place is fit for 
worship again.” 

The correspondent of ‘Pratap’ reports the following incident which 
appears in its issue of 2nd September 1932: 

“Meerut August 1932. On the day of Janmashtami some Harijans 
tried to gain admittance into Caste Hindu Temple but nothing came 
except widespread troubles and unrest. This year the local Dalit 
Association has decided that if the doors of the temples are not 
opened to them, they will undertake Satyagraha. When the Hindus 
came to know of this, they started making plans to defeat the moves 
of the Harijans. At last on the night of Janmashtami, the members 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


36 


36 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of the Harijan community came in the form of a procession and tried 
to gain access to the temple Gods. The priests, however, refused them 
permission to enter and said, “You can have audience of the Gods 
standing outside on the street.” Upon this a great crowd gathered 
at the place. The priests tried to enter the temple and thus a clash 
took place between the two parties and blows were freely exchanged.” 

The Hindus do not allow the Untouchables to enter the Hindu 
temples. It would be thought that they would allow the Untouchables 
to have their own temples and install therein the image of God. That is 
a mistake. The Hindus will not allow even that. It is enough to quote 
two instances. One is from the ‘Pratap’ of 12th February 1923: 

“In the District of Agra, a Chamar who had seen a Brahmin 
worshipping the image of Vishnu in his hous’e, began to do the 
same himself. When the Brahmin came to know of this he was most 
indignant and with the help of a number of villagers caught hold of 
the ill-fated Harijan, gave him a sound beating saying, ‘How dare 
you try to win over the God Vishnu’. Finally, they stuffed his mouth 
with filth and left him. In sheer desperation the Chamar abandoned 
the Hindu faith and embraced Islam.” 

The other is from the ‘ Hindu of 4th July 1939: 

“A meeting of the Bellary District Harijan Advisory Board was 
held on 29th June 1939 at the Collector’s Bunglow. Mr. A. D. Crombie, 
CIE., ICS., President of the Committee and Collector presided. 

With regard to the grievances of the Harijans of Narayanadevarakeri 
including allegations of extraction of forced labour from them and 
harassment by money-lenders, the Committee decided to call for 
official report, with a view to taking action, if necessary. 

The religious disabilities of the Harijans residing in Kudathini 
village were brought to the notice of the Committee. It was alleged 
that though the Harijans constructed a temple in their colony as 
long as twelve years ago, they could not install the image of God 
which was also ready in the temple, owing to the objections raised 
by a section of the Caste Hindus in the place to the Harijans taking 
out the image in procession in the village before the installation.” 

II 

How any attempt to take water from the Hindu well is dealt with 
by the Hindus can be seen from the following instances. The first one 
appeared in the ‘ Pratap ’ of 12th February 1923: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


37 


UNTOUCHABILITY AND LAWLESSNESS 37 

“Mahashaya Chhedi Lalji has reported that a Chamar was going 
for idol worship, when on the way he felt thirsty. He cast his own 
iron pail into a well and drew out some water. Upon this he was 
rebuked by a high caste Hindu and then soundly beaten and locked 
up in a room. As it happened, I was passing by and when I enquired 
why this man was being kept under lock and key, the Diwan Saheb 
replied that this man cast his own pail into our well and wants to 
profane religion.” 

That even the Hindu women will not hesitate to take part in the 
assaults committed by the Hindus against the Untouchables who dare to 
take water from the Hindu well is a fact. Compare the following report 
which appeared in the ‘Pratap’ of 26th February 1932: 

“On 19th February 1932, a very tragic incident took place in 
the village of Pul Bajwan. This happened when Mahashaya Ramlal 
went to fetch some water from a well, the same well at which 
on 13th January 1932 some Rajputs had belaboured Mahashaya 
Ramlal and his companion, Pandit Bansilal. At that time, a crowd 
of Rajput women came up armed with all sorts of bats and sticks 
and gave such a sound beating to the Mahashaya that it is difficult 
to describe. All his body was covered with blood by the time the 
Rajput women had done with him. At this time, he is admitted in 
the hospital of Phuklian.” 

That even the support of an officer of Government in the exercise of 
their right to take water from the well will not save the Untouchables 
from assault is clear from the following incident which appeared in the 
‘ Milap ’ of 7th June 1924: 

“Some days ago, an officer of the Canal Department came to 
the village of Rahian in Tehsil Sabha and he ordered some Megha 
Untouchables to help in drawing out water from a well. At first 
they refused but the officer rebuked them sternly and forced them 
to draw water. The next day the Hindus gathered at the well and 
sent for the Megha through a Chowkidar and asked them why they 
dared to climb up to the well. One Megha replied that they were 
obliged to do so and it was no fault of theirs. For this cheek he 
was attacked by the Hindus with sticks and hands and until the 
time of writing this, he is lying unconscious. Although the doctor 
has declared that the injuries are minor ones, a report of attempted 
murder and unlawful assembly has been filed with the Police. This 
however has been ignored and the indifference of the police has 
created a feeling of great insecurity among the Megha people. The 
villagers are persecuting the Meghas very much, even their cattle 
are not allowed to drink water and all wells and ponds have been 
closed to them.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


38 


38 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Untouchables cannot take water from the Hindu well is not all. 
They must not build a pucca brick well for themselves even though they 
may have the money to do so. For having a pucca well for themselves 
means an attempt to raise themselves to the status of the Hindus which 
is contrary to the Established Order. 

The ‘Milap’ of 6th June 1934 reports the following incidents: 

“Lala Ram Prashadji, Secretary of the Achhut Udharak 
Committee, Punjab, has written to the following effects: 

“During this hot season, complaints are being received from 
everywhere that the supply of water is becoming a great problem. 

The Depressed Class people, who have no wells of their own sit 
near the well with their vessels in their hands. If someone is kind 
enough to pour out some water, well and good, otherwise they sit 
helpless. In some places, however, no one is allowed to pour out 
water to these people even for money and if anyone does so, mortal 
fights ensue. Not only is the use of the village wells forbidden to 
them, but they are not even allowed to make wells of their own 
with their own money.” 

To the same effect is the incident reported in the “Tej” of 21st April 
1924: 


“The Chamars of the village, Opad, numbered about 250. About a 
month and half ago, they gave up drinking water out of the leather 
bags of the Muslim water carriers (on the suggestions of the Arya 
Samaj Pandits?) and now they are in great difficulties about their 
water supply. The Jats of the village not only refuse to let them 
draw water out of the village wells but do not even let them make 
wells of their own. The poor Chamars are living on water from ponds 
and ditches. Yesterday, Dr. Sukhdevji, Secretary of Dalit Sudhar 
(Harijan Uplift) Committee came to make investigations in Upad 
and saw everything with his own eyes. He found the condition of 
the Chamars abject beyond words and their persecution by the Jats 
a real fact.” 

The following is from the ‘Times of India’ dated 9th May 1931: 

“In the Baroda State the Untouchables are supposed to be better 
treated than in the adjoining British territory, because the State has 
made laws recognising the equality of the Antyaja with caste people. 
And yet in Padras Taluka the other day the standing crop of a poor 
Antyaja woman was fired and she herself brutally assaulted, because 
she dared to send her little son to the local primary school. Now 
comes a tale of woe from Chanasma in Kadi Prant where an artisian 
well has been sunk and built with the labour of the Antayajas who 
were promised the use of the well. But when the well was ready for 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


39 


UNTOUCHABILITY AND LAWLESSNESS 39 

use they were first flatly told it was not for them, and when they 
complained to the Punch the latter generously allowed them to lay 
a pipe 500 feet long at the end of which they could have a tap all 
for themselves. Now an unexpected owner of the land at the tap 
had cropped up, so the pipe line was taken somewhere near to 
the local tank, but this meant pollution of the tank and therefore 
of the dirty linen washed there. So the tap was accommodated 
elsewhere. But did this mean the end of the trouble? No, the 
enraged caste people have cut the pipe line several times and 
the Antyajas are without water to drink. How very ‘adequate’ to 
use Mr. Gandhi’s term, must the Untouchables feel the treatment 
given to them by their coreligionists.” 

Mr. Sanjana in a letter to the ‘ Times of India’ of the 7th November 
1928 reports what Mr. Thakkar saw in the year 1927 regarding the 
awful plight of the Untouchables in the matter of water. 

“In Balsad Taluk, Mr. Thakkar saw a Bhangi woman waiting 
near a well for some merciful ‘people’ to give her some water. 

She had waited from morning till noon, and none had given her 
any. But the most exquisite touch of spirituality is revealed in 
the manner of giving water to the Bhangis; it cannot be poured 
direct into their pots — any ‘people’ doing so would get polluted. 
Says, Mr. Thakkar, ‘once our teacher Chunibhai had shown the 
temerity of pouring water direct from his bucket into a Bhangi’s 
pot and he had received a stern warning in consequence ‘Master 
this sort of thing won’t be (tolerated) here’. A small cistern is built 
below the slope of the well. Anyone who is moved by pity may 
pour some water in the cistern. A bamboo pipe just out of the 
cistern, and the Bhangi women must put her pot under the pipe, 
and it may get filled in an hour or so. For, adds Mr. Thakkar, it 
is only the unwanted water remaining over in the bucket of the 
woman drawing it that is as a rule thrown into the cistern, and 
that too if she takes pity on the waiting Bhangi woman.” 

Ill 

Under the established order, the Untouchables have no right to 
education and certainly have no right to be admitted to the village 
school. Those Untouchables who have dared to make a breach in 
these rules of the Established Order have been severely punished 
by the Hindus. The following are only a few of the numerous cases 
that have happened: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


40 


40 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

From the 'Ary a Gazette' of Lahore dated 30th June 1921: 

“A Mahashaya wrote an article in the paper ‘Young India', in 
which he reported that in district Surat there is a village called 
Sisodri. In a very short span of time it has made such progress 
on the path of nationalism, that it could be held up as a model of 
non-cooperation. With all this, however, the old contempt for the 
Harijan remains. The writer says that in the nationalist school of 
that place, 1 saw a Dhed caste child sitting all apart in one corner 
of the class room and proclaiming by his very looks that he was an 
untouchable. I asked the students why they did not let this boy sit 
with them and they replied: that this could not be until the Harijan 
left drinking wine and eating meat. The Harijan boy at once said 
that he had already given these up. The high caste students could 
say nothing now.” 

From the ‘ Pratap ’ of 12th February 1923: 

“Mahashaya Santramji has reported : 

It happened recently that a Brahmin teacher was appointed by 
the Government to go and teach in a village school for Chamar boys. 
When he came there, the Brahmins, Kshatrias and others boycotted 
the teacher saying, ‘You have come here to teach the Chamars and 
raise them to our level. Have You?” 

From the ‘Tej’ of 11th April 1924: 

“Swami Shradhanandji has written: 

There was a nationalist school in Khatsayas which I visited 
towards the end of November 1921. When 1 enquired how many 
Harijan children read there, I was told only three and they too, sit 
outside the class room in the verandah. In my lecture I objected to 
this procedure and said that in a nationalist institution, it was only 
proper that these boys should be allowed to sit inside the class room. 
The manager of the school acted on my advice. The next day the 
benches of the school were all deserted and till this day the Grand 
building of that nationalist school stands locked out and dreary.” 

From “Milap” dated 18th April 1924: 

“Here is an incident from Hoshungabad. The district Council 
sent a circular letter to the schools that the Harijan children should 
be educated in the schools. The headmasters began to act on the 
orders. When one of the schools admitted some Harijan children 
the Honorary Magistrate took great offence at it and withdrew his 
children from that school; other guardians also followed suit and 
all together got a meeting of the school committee convened and 
resolutions passed in it, that the education of Harijans in the school 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


41 


UNTOUCHABILITY AND LAWLESSNESS 41 

is against the Public wishes. They said that after coming into contact 
with Harijans, the Brahmin children change their Janayu (a religious 
thread) therefore this school committee could not undertake the 
education of Harijan children.” 

From “Pratap” dated 3rd April 1932: 

“Ahmedabad, 1st April 1932: A report has been received from 
the village of Nawagaon, Baroda State, that ever since the Harijan 
schools were closed down and permission given to the Harijans to 
enter the ordinary village schools, the villagers have been subjecting 
the Harijans to endless persecution. It is reported that the thousand 
stacks of hay belonging to Harijan farmers, were burnt down, Kerosine 
oil has been sprinkled into the Harijan wells and attempts made 
to set fire to their houses. A Harijan boy was assaulted on his way 
to school and a general boycott of the Harijans has been declared.” 

The “ Hindustan Times” in its issue of 26th May 1939 says: 

“Several persons are reported to have raided a night school in 
village Catipore in the district where Kisans and others used to be 
taught. The teacher was caught hold of by them, and asked to close 
the school on the ground that the boys of the Untouchables, after 
acquiring education will begin to assert themselves to treat them 
on a footing of equality. When the teacher refused to do so he was 
belaboured and the students were asked to disperse.” 

The last instance I would like to refer occurred in the year 1935 
in the village of Kavitha in Dholka Taluka of the Ahmedabad District 
of the Bombay Presidency. The incident occurred on 8th August 1935. 

As the Bombay Government had issued orders requiring the admission 
of the children of the Untouchables in public schools, the Untouchables of 
village Kavitha thought of taking advantage of the order. What happened 
to them is reported below: 

“On 8-8-1935, the Untouchables of the village Kavitha took four 
of their children to be admitted in the village school. Many caste 
Hindus from the village had gathered near the school to witness 
this. This occasion for admission passed off quietly and nothing 
untoward happened. From the next day however the caste Hindus 
of the village withdrew their children from the school as they did 
not like their children sitting with those of the Untouchables and 
getting themselves polluted.” 

“Some time thereafter an Untouchable from the village was 
assaulted by a Brahmin on 13th August 1935. The male members 
of the Untouchables of the village had come to Dholka to file 
a criminal complaint against the Brahmin in the court of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


42 


42 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Magistrate. Coming to know that the adult members of the 
Untouchables were absent the Hindus of the village invaded the 
quarters of the Untouchables. They were armed with sticks, spears 
and swords. Among the invaders were caste Hindu women. They 
started attacking the old men and women of the Untouchables. Some 
of the victims fled into the jungle, some shut themselves up. These 
invaders directed their vehemence against those Untouchables who 
were suspected to have taken a lead in the matter of the admission 
of their children in the village school. They broke open their doors 
and not finding them in, they broke the tiles and the rafters of 
the roofs over their houses. 

“Terror-stricken these Untouchables men and women who 
were assaulted and beaten were anxious about the safety of those 
of their elders who had gone to Dholka and who were expected 
back that night. The caste Hindus knowing that the leaders of 
Untouchables who had gone to Dholka would be returning had 
concealed themselves behind the bushes and shrubs on the way to 
the village. Having come to know of this, an old Untouchable woman 
sneaked out of the village in the dark, met the leaders who were 
returning and informed them that armed gangs of caste Hindus 
were hiding themselves to waylay them and that therefore they 
should not come into the village. They refused to listen fearing that 
the caste Hindus might do greater mischief in their absence. At 
the same time, they were afraid that if they did enter they might 
be assaulted. They therefore decided to wait outside the village in 
the field till after midnight. In the meantime, the gang of caste 
Hindus who were in ambush waited and waited and finally gave 
up the game and retired. The leaders of the Untouchables entered 
the village after about 3 a.m. in the night. If they had come earlier 
and met the murderous gang they would probably have been done 
to death. On seeing the harm done to person and property they 
left the village for Ahmedabad before day break, and informed 
the Secretary of the Harijan Sevak Sangh, a body organized by 
Mr. Gandhi to look after the welfare of the Untouchables. But the 
Secretary was helpless. Not only did the caste Hindus use physical 
violence, but they conspired to make the life of the Untouchables 
intolerable. They refused to engage them as labourers; they refused 
to sell them foodstuffs. They refused to give them facilities for 
grazing their cattle and they used to commit stray assaults on 
Untouchable men and women. Not only this, but the caste Hindus 
in their frenzy poured kerosine oil in the well from which the 
Untouchables used to get their supply of drinking water. This, they 
did for days together. The result was that the Untouchables of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


43 


UNTOUCHABILITY AND LAWLESSNESS 43 


village had no water. When things reached this stage the Untouchables 
thought of filing criminal complaint before a Magistrate which they 
did on 17th October, making some of the caste Hindus as the accused.” 

“The strange part of the case is the part played by Mr. Gandhi 
and his henchman, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. With all the knowledge 
of tyranny and oppression practised by the caste Hindus of Kavitha 
against the Untouchables all that Mr. Gandhi felt like doing was 
to advise the Untouchables to leave the village. He did not even 
suggest that the miscreants should be hauled up before a court of 
law. His henchman Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel, played a part which was 
still more strange. He had gone to Kavitha to persuade the caste 
Hindus not to molest the Untouchables. But they did not even give 
him a hearing. Yet this very man was opposed to the Untouchables 
hauling them up in a court of Law and getting them punished. The 
Untouchables filed the complaint notwithstanding his oppostion. But 
he ultimately forced them to withdraw the complaint on the caste 
Hindus making some kind of a show of an understanding not to 
molest, an undertaking which the Untouchables can never enforce. 

The result was that the Untouchables suffered and their tyrants 
escaped with the aid of Mr. Gandhi’s friend, Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel. 

IV 

The Untouchables are claimed by the Hindus as Hindus. But the 
dead body of an Untouchable cannot be cremated in the Hindu cremation 
ground. 

The “ Free Press ” of 7th June 1946 reports the following: 

“Citing a recent criminal case in which two Madura Harijans 
were sentenced to four months rigorous imprisonment for doing 
an act which was likely to wound the feelings of others, Mr. A. 

S. Vaidyanatha Iyer in a communication to the press draws the 
attention of the public to the ‘cruel suffering which the Harijans 
have to bear by reason of Untouchability.’ 

Mr. Vaidyanatha Iyer says: ‘A Madura Harijan who had lost his 
eldest child cremated the body in the Madura municipal burning ghat in 
a shed which is said to be set apart for caste Hindus instead of in the 
one reserved for Harijans. The Harijan’s plea was, he did not know of 
any such reservation, that it was drizzling and that the former place was 
better. No caste Hindu raised any objection nor was there any proof that 
anyone’s feelings were wounded. The incident came to the notice of the 
Madura police who prosecuted the father of the child and another near 
relation on the ground that such act was likely to wound the feelings 
of others because the Harijans were Untouchables. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


44 


44 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Iyer adds, “he brought this case to the notice of the Madras 
Ministry.” 

The ‘Savadhan’ of 22nd April 1945 says: 

“On 18th March 1945, a sweeper died in the village Floda, District 
Muzaffarnagar. The Sweepers of the village took the dead body to the 
cremation grounds. This enraged the Tyagi Brahmins of the village 
who abused the sweepers for their audacity in bringing their dead 
to the caste Hindu grounds. The sweepers protested that they were 
Hindus and would cremate the dead. But the Brahmins were not 
at all amenable to reason and told the sweepers that irrespective 
of their being Hindus and Muslims they must bury their dead and 
if they failed to do it they (Brahmins) would themselves bury the 
dead body. When the poor sweepers were thus threatened and were 
also afraid of being beaten they buried the dead body.” 

This is not all. There is a further point to be noted. The Touchable 
Hindus dispose of the dead body by cremating it. Just because it is a 
presumption on the part of the Untouchables to initiate the ways of the 
Hindus which are marks of their superior status, the Untouchables must 
necessarily bury their dead even if they do not wish to do so. 

An instance of this compulsory burial was reported in the ‘ Milap ’ of 
6th June 1924: 

“The chief cause of the awakening among the Untouchables is 
the tyranny of the Hindus. I was not aware of this but the reports 
that I have received from various workers has caused me much pain. 
From one place I am informed that the Untouchables of that place 
are not allowed to even burn their dead. This, however it seems has 
created a new spirit among the sweepers of the place. They have 
started burying their dead with the head downwards probably to 
distinguish themselves from others who bury the corpse in a lying 
position. The Sweepers think that if they also act in imitation of 
others, it is derogatory.” 

V 

The wearing of the sacred thread is evidence of noble birth. The 
Untouchables with the idea of ennobling themselves thought of wearing 
the sacred thread. The atrocities committed by the caste Hindus on the 
Untouchables of the village Ringwari in Garhwal District in U. P. are 
reported in the ‘National Herald ’ of 6th June: 

“After leading a fugitive life for well nigh two months as a 
result of persecution at the hands of the caste Hindus, ten families 
consisting of 33 Harijans have now been able to return to their 
homes in village Ringwari of Chandkot with the help of the district 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


45 


UNTOUCHABILITY AND LAWLESSNESS 45 

authorities of Garhwal. These Harijans, it may be recalled, had 
taken full advantage of the social movement started for their uplift 
by Mahatma Gandhi and the late Swami Shradhanand. They had 
taken the sacred thread and made it a part of their duty to perform 
‘Sandhya’. But this was resented very much by the caste Hindus of 
Garhwal as according to them it amounted to a virtual invasion of 
their ‘right and privileges’. The resentment found expression in a 
number of assaults on Harijans and persistent social persecution. 
They were asked to desist from using ‘polies’ and ‘palkies’ in their 
marriage procession and four of them were compelled at one place 
to kill a buffalo and eat its flesh. At Ringwari these atrocities 
reached a climax, when all the water springs, grazing grounds 
and other public places were closed to the Harijans who refused 
to submit to the caste Hindus. In consequence the abovementioned 
ten families had to leave their villages at dead of night, in order 
to avoid further persecution.” 

Other instances of similar sort are given below: 

1. “Some Arya Samajists managed to raise the caste of some 
Untouchables and gave them the sign of the caste, namely, 
the religious thread worn round the neck. But the mass of the 
Sanatanists could not bear even this because their religion does 
not allow the Untouchables to wear the thread. This is why 
thread-wearing Untouchables are daily persecuted by the high 
caste Hindus.” 

2. “Bhagat Harichand of Moila, District Mirpur, Jammu State 
was purified by the Arya Samajists and given the thread to wear. 

The Hindu Jats of the place began to victimize him and ask him 
to put off the thread. Harichand however remained steadfast on 
his religion. At last one day when the Bhagat Harichand had 
finished the Gaitri Path, he was caught hold of by the Hindu Jats 
and severely beaten and his thread broken. The cause of their 
incensement was this that wheareas before the Shudh, Shudha 
Meghs had addressed the Jats as ‘Gharib Nawaz’ (the benefactors 
of the poor), now they only use ‘Namastey’.” 

From the Arya Gazette dated 14th September 1929: 

“The Hindu Rajputs of the village Ramani, near the town 
Berhampur, Distt. Gurdaspur, called the Untouchables of their 
villages from their homes and ordered them to put off the holy 
thread at once and swear never to put it on again otherwise 
their lives were in danger. Upon this Untouchables calmly replied 
‘Maharaj why are you angry with us. Your own brothers, the Arya 
Samajists have very kindly put these threads round our necks and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


46 


46 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


have ordered us to always protect them for they are the true symbols 
of the Hindu faith. If you take objection to them, you can tear them 
off our bodies with your own hands’. Upon this the Rajputs fell 
upon the poor men with their lathis and kept on thrashing them 
for a long time. The Untouchables put up with this persecution with 
great fortitude and refused to resist or protest. But their torments 
took no pity on their helpless condition and three or four Rajputs 
actually tore the holy thread off the body of a Harijan named Gori 
Ram and bruised his body with a hoe in mock imitation of the sign 
of the thread.” 

From the ‘Milap’ dated 12th October 1929: 

“The Rajputs of the village Bahmani have from time past 
launched a programme against the Untouchables. There is a case 
going on in the court about the breaking of a holy thread and there 
is another case too, about an Untouchable woman who was going on 
to the field to cut the harvest on 7th October 1929 when a Rajput 
severely thrashed her and caused serious bruises. The woman was 
brought home on a bed.” 


VI 

What happens to an Untouchable if he remains seated on a cot in 
the presence of a Hindu can be seen from the following incident reported 
in ‘Jivan of July 1938: 

“Nanda Ram and Mangali Prasad of village Pachhahera, Police 
Post Margaon, Tehsil and District Sitapur, invited their friends and 
relatives for a communal feast. When the guests were sitting on 
cots and smoking, Thakkur Sooraj Baksh Singh and Harpal Singh, 
Zamindars of the village, came there, sent for Nanda Ram and 
Mangali Prasad and asked who the people sitting and smoking were 
and why they were sitting on cots. Mangali Prasad said that they 
were his friends and relatives and asked if only Thakkurs could sit 
on cots. Enraged by this, the Thakkurs beat both the brothers and 
their men beat the guests severely as a result of which one man and 
one woman became senseless and others sustained serious injuries.” 

VII 

The Untouchables are Hindus. They are also citizens with the same 
civic rights. But the Untouchables cannot claim the right of the citizenship 
if it conflicts with any rules of the Established Order. 

For instance, no Untouchable can claim lodging in an inn even though 
it be public. In ‘Jivan’ of August 1938, is reported the experience of an 
Untouchable named Kannhaiya Lai Jatav of Fetegarh: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


47 


UNTOUCHABILITY AND LAWLESSNESS 47 

“When I went to stay in Dharmashala near Allahabad Junction 
on 15th August 1938 at 10 p.m. there was no difficulty and I laid 
down on a cot after paying an advance of Re. 1. But at 11 p.m. 
when the lodgers went to the Manager of the Dharmashala to note 
down their addresses, and while noting down my address I put 
down my caste as Jatav, the Manager got wild and said that the 
Dharmashala was not meant for the stay of low caste people and 
asked me to get out at once. I pointed out to him that according to 
the rules of the Dharmashala, it was meant for Hindus only and 
there was no ban on Untouchables and asked if I was not a Hindu 
that he was asking me to leave. I also pleaded that being resident 
of Farrukabad and not acquainted with anyone in Allahabad there 
was no place where I could go at 11 p.m. On this, the Manager 
got furious and repeating the couplet from Ramayan (Shudras 
illiterate, cattle and women all these deserve to be beaten) said 
that in spite of being a low-caste he dared to talk about rules and 
law and will not get out unless he is beaten. Then suddenly he got 
my bedding etc., threw out of the Dharmashala and all of them 
were ready to beat me. In the face of such odds, I at once left the 
Dharmashala and lay down on a plank of wood in front of a shop 
facing the Dharmashala and had to pay annas 2 as rent to the 
shopkeeper for a night. I therefore appeal to my Scheduled Caste 
brethren to hold meetings everywhere and request Government to 
construct separate Dharmashalas for our people in every town or 
to get all the existing Dharmashalas opened for us.” 

VIII 

Under the Established Order, the work of lifting and removing 
dead cattle as well as doing the scavenger’s work is beneath the 
dignity of the Hindus. It must be done by the Untouchables. The 
Untouchables have also begun to think that it is derogatory to their 
status and are refusing to do it. The Untouchables, however, are 
forced by the Hindus to do it against their will. The ‘jivan of June 
1938 reports: 

“One day, in May 1938, Bhajju Ram Jatav of village Bipoli, 
Police post Barla, District Aligarh was sitting in his house at 
about 11 a.m. when some Brahmins namely Prithik, Hodal, Sita 
Ram, Devi and Chuni, all of whom had lathis came and tried to 
force him to lift dead cattle; and when he refused saying that he 
was not used to that work and asked them to go to some one who 
does that sort of work, he was mercilessly belaboured with lathis.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


48 


48 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The same journal in its issue of October 1938 gives the following 
news item: 

“On 24th October 1938, some cattle of a Brahmin of village 
Lodhari, Tehsil Sadabad, District Muttra, died. The Scheduled Caste 
people of the village who were asked to lift it refused to do so. 
This enraged the caste Hindus so much that they have asked the 
Scheduled Caste people not to go to their fields for ablutions nor to 
allow their cattle to graze in their (caste Hindus) fields.” 

IX 

The Untouchables must not wear decent and clean clothes and they 
must not wear gold or silver ornaments. If the Untouchables defy these 
rules, the Hindus will not hesitate to bring them to book. The Untouchables 
have been trying to defy these rules, with what consequences will be seen 
from the following incidents which have been reported in the newspapers: 

“Until 1922, the Untouchable caste of Dalai in Berar District of 
Bundi, were forbidden to eat wheat. In February 1922, a Chamar 
woman was put on the Rock in Sakatgarh, Jaipur, simply because 
she was wearing silver ornaments on her feet. The reason given was 
this that only men of the high castes were allowed to wear silver 
or to eat wheat. The low caste people should not dare to aspire to 
these things. So far we had been thinking that such antiquated 
ideas were supposed to have had probably died out by this time.” 

The ‘ Times of India’ in its issue of 4th January 1928 reports 
the tyranny and oppression practised upon the Balais who form an 
Untouchable community in Central India for their daringness to wear 
clean clothes and golden ornaments. Says the ‘Times’: 

“In May (1927) high caste Hindus viz., Kalotas Rajputs and 
Brahmins including the Patils and Patwaris of villages Kanaria, 
Bicholee Hafsi, Bicholi Mardana and of about 15 other villages in 
the Indore district informed the Balais of their respective villages 
that if they wished to live among them, they must conform to the 
following rules: 

1. Balais must not wear gold lace bordered pugrees; 

2. They must not wear dhoties with coloured or fancy borders; 

3. They must convey intimation of the death of any Hindu to relatives 
of the deceased — no matter how far away these relatives may be 
living; 

4. In all Hindu marriages, the Balais must play music before the 
processions, and during the marriages; 

5. The Balai women must not wear fancy gowns for jackets; 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


49 


UNTOUCHABILITY AND LAWLESSNESS 49 

6. Balai women must attend all cases of confinement of Hindu 
women; 

7. The Balais must render services without demanding remuneration, 
and must accept whatever a Hindu is pleased to give; 

8. If the Balais do not agree to abide by these terms, they must 
clear out of the villages. 

The Balais refused to comply; and the Hindu element proceeded 
against them. Balais were not allowed to get water from the village 
wells; they were not allowed to let their cattle to graze. Balais were 
prohibited from passing through land owned by a Hindu; so that 
if the field of a Balai was surrounded by fields owned by Hindus, 
the Balai could have no access to his own field. The Hindus also 
let their cattle graze down the fields of Balais. 

The Balais submitted petitions to the Darbar of Indore against 
these persecutions, but as they could get no timely relief, and the 
oppression continued, hundreds of Balais with their wives and 
children, were obliged to abandon their homes in which their ancestors 
lived for generations, and to migrate to adjoining states, viz. to 
villages in Dhar, Dewas, Bagli, Bhopal, Gwalipr and other states. 

Only a few days ago the Hindus of Reoti village barely 8 miles 
to the North of Indore city ordered the Balais to sign a stamped 
agreement in accordance with the rules framed against the Balais 
by the Hindus of other villages. The Balais refused to comply. It 
is alleged that some of them were beaten by the Hindus; and one 
Balai was fastened to a post, and was told that he would be let go, 
on agreeing to sign the agreement. He signed the agreement, and 
was released”. 

The next is from the ‘Arya Gazette ’ dated 21st January 1928: 

“Up till now the tales of woe that were usually related of the 
persecution of the Harijans were mostly from the Madras province, 
but now thanks to the treatment of the Maharana of the Simla 
Hills, one has not to go so far to search for these stories. In the 
Simla district, there dwells a caste called ‘Collie’ whose members 
are very handsome and hard working. The Hindus of that area 
consider them to be Untouchables although they do not engage 
in any such work which should render them objectionable in the 
eyes of the Hindu religion. The members of this caste are not 
only powerful and well-built but intelligent also. Almost all the 
songs that the dwellers of the Simla Hills sing are composed by 
the ‘Collies’. These people labour all day long and venerate the 
Brahmins excessively but still they cannot so much as pass near 
the house of a Brahmin. Their children cannot read in schools and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


50 


50 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

‘Pathashalas’ (religious monastic schools). Their women folk cannot 
wear gold ornaments. It has even been reported that some Collies 
have gone to the Punjab and earned some money with which they 
have bought gold rings and ear-rings. When however they have 
brought these back to their homes, they have been cast into the 
jail and not freed until the ornaments had passed into the pockets 
of the State Officers.” 

The following letter appeared in the ‘ Pratap ’ of 23rd June 1926: 

“Swami Ramanandji Sanyasi writes: 

On the 23rd of March 1926, in the evening a Chamar came to 
me who had recently managed to escape from the clutches of the 
Jats. He related to me a moving tale of the sufferings that his 
caste had to put up with in the village of Kheri near Faridabad in 
the District of Gurgaon. On the morning of 24th March I reached 
Faridabad in the District of Gurgaon, so as to investigate the state 
of affairs myself. The result of my enquiries is briefly as follows: 

“On the 5th of March the marriage took place of the daughter 
of a Chamar called Gorkhi. The financial condition of the Chamar 
was comparatively good and he entertained his guests in the 
same way as people of the high castes do. Moreover, before 
handing away his daughter, he gave her three gold ornaments. 
This news spread amongst the Jats and was widely discussed. It 
was decided finally that the high castes had been insulted by the 
fact that the lower castes have started vieing with them. Till the 
20th of March nothing untoward happened but on the morning 
of the 21st the Jats called a meeting of the Panchayat (village 
council) to consider the matter. Just at that moment a party 
of the Chamars of which the greater portion was composed of 
boys, girls and women was setting out for Faridabad on its daily 
duty. The party had just gone out of the village as far as the 
Dharmashala when the Jats attacked it. All the men of the party 
were belaboured and the women were thrashed with shoes. The 
backs of some were broken and of some the arms. Not only this, 
even their implements were robbed. A Muslim happened to pass 
along that way and the Jats took hold of him also and robbed him 
of his big gold ear-rings as well as of twenty-eight rupees. On the 
22nd of March some groups of the Jats went into the fields of the 
Chamar and played havoc with them. The crop thus destroyed was 
estimated at about a thousand rupees. At that time, Nanwa, the 
son of Kori, was working in the fields. The Jats gave him also a 
thorough beating. On the 22nd of March again a party of the Jats 
sallied forth armed with flaming torches dipped in Kerosene oil, 
with the intention of setting fire to the houses of the Chamars 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


51 


UNTOUCHABILITY AND LAWLESSNESS 51 

but later came away. On the 23rd of March at midnight a house 
was set on fire belonging to the grandfather of that married 
girl who has been mentioned above. The house is now a heap of 
ashes. It contained sixteen skins ready to be made into shoes and 
worth 90 rupees. They also got burnt up together with the other 
household goods. The general situation now is that the Jats have 
surrounded the town and no Chamar is allowed to go out. The 
Baniyas also, out of fear of the Jats, have refused to sell anything 
to the Chamars. For three days the Chamars as well as their 
cattle have been starving.” 

The following is a more recent occurrence. It has happened in 
Malabar. The facts of the case are revealed by the following resolution 
passed at the first Chirakal Taluka Harijan Conference held at 
Cherukunn in Malabar on 5th June 1945 with Shri K. Kannan, M.L.A., 
presiding: 

“This Conference invites the urgent attention of the Government 
and the public to the increasing cases of inhuman oppressions of the 
Scheduled Castes of Malabar by Hindus, Muslims and Christians, 
particularly to the severest type of oppression now going on, 
almost with impunity, in the Nattika Firka, Ponnani Taluk, where 
something like a regular Harijan hunting is taking place every 
day as a result of the Harijans trying to wear gold ornaments and 
use clean clothes and umbrellas. In addition to numerous cases of 
assaults a Harijan marriage party was way-laid and assaulted and 
the shirts of men and the sarees of women removed by force and 
a Harijan student mercilessly beaten in Vadanpilly on 27th May 
1945. This Conference while congratulating the progressive Thiya 
youths of the place under the enlightened leadership of Messrs. 

C. S. Gopalan, M. S. Sankaranarayan and P. C. Ramakrishna 
Vydier for their magnificient efforts to help the Harijans, most 
emphatically protests against the callous indifference of the local 
authorities, particularly of the Police Department in that the ill- 
treated Harijans did not get any timely protection from them. 

This conference desires to state that almost in all cases of the 
above-said oppressions, the aggrieved Harijans have received neither 
protection nor justice from the police. There are instances where 
poor Harijans were even beaten by the Police for their coming 
forward to give evidence in such cases. In so far as these events 
have reduced the Harijans of Malabar to a very miserable plight 
and the situation, if left alone, is likely to develop into a crisis 
endangering the lives of all progressive Harijans who are trying to 
break the shackles of caste and economic exploitation of the vested 
interests in Malbar. This Conference most earnestly appeals to the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


52 


52 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Government of India, the Hon’ble Dr. B. R. Ambedkar and all 
the enlightened people in the country to see that the Harijans 
are allowed to live in this land as free citizens of a democratic 
country unmolested by any people and promptly protected by the 
administration whenever they are oppressed by others.” 

X 

The Untouchables must not eat rich food even if they can afford it. 

It is an offence for the Untouchables to live above their station in life. 

The ‘ Pratap ’ of 26th February 1928. relates the following occurrence: 

“In the State of Jodhpur at a place Chandayal, you will still 
see men who do not think that the Harijans have even the right 
to eat Halva. One of the Untouchable castes is that of Sargaroes. 
Sometime back on the occasion of the Marriage ceremony of two or 
three girls, Halva was prepared for the members of the marriage 
party. For this purpose, maida (white flour) was brought from the 
Thakur Sahib. At mealtime, the marriage party came for meals 
but just at that time the Kanwar Sahib of Chandawala sent orders 
to the Saragaroes that they could not eat Halva. Some cringing 
sycophants negotiated a compromise in this way that the Kanwar 
Sahib be presented with Rs. 200 and then permission will be given 
to eat Halva. At this the Sargaroes got infuriated and refused to 
pay the money.” 


XI 

To lead a marriage procession through the main streets of the 
village is the right of every caste Hindu. It is also in evidence that 
the community which enjoys this right is accepted as a respectable 
community. The Untouchables have no such right. But they have been 
seeking to establish such a right by taking their marriage procession 
through the main streets of the village with the object of establishing 
their social status. The following incidents show how the Hindus have 
dealt with this claim. 

From the Adi-Hindu dated July 1927: 

“Bangalore, 27th May 1927: Seven Brahmins were sentenced to 
pay a fine of hundred rupees each, by the First Class Magistrate. 
These men had wantonly attacked a procession of the well-known 
Pariah Untouchable caste when it was passing along the Mallkot 
Road where only Brahmins live.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


53 


UNTOUCHABILITY AND LAWLESSNESS 53 

From the ‘Pratap’ dated 25th October 1931: 

“In the village of Hargaon, district Garhwal when the high caste 
Hindus heard that a marriage party of the Untouchables was coming 
and the bridegroom was sitting in a palanquin they sallied forth 
in great numbers and surrounded the party and gave it a severe 
beating. In intense cold they held up the marriage party and kept it 
without food for 24 hours. The members of the party were inhumanly 
treated and were only rescued from this difficult situation by the 
coming of the Police.” 

From the ‘Satya Samwad’ Lahore dated 3rd November 1931: 

“A marriage party was passing near Delhi, carrying the 
bridegroom in a palanquin. The high caste Hindus took offence at 
this for they thought it to be an insult to them. They held up the 
party for two days and gave it nothing either to eat or drink. At 
last the police came and chased away these tyrants and rescued 
the marriage party.” 

The ‘Jivan’, a Hindu journal for June 1938 reports: 

1. “In village Sevra, the Golas (Purva Thakurs) who boast of 
being Congressites, have so mercilessly beaten with spears and 
lathis the unarmed Jatavs of that village that five of them were 
lying wounded in the hospital with arms and ribs broken. Bansi 
has sustained fracture of the skull bone and is still unconscious 
in the hospital. All this happened because when a marriage party 
came to the village the bridegroom was wearing a glittering crown 
(Pukka Mohar) which offended the Thakurs, who wanted to attack 
the marriage party; but desisted because of the party’s superior 
strength and were therefore content with only insulting the marriage 
party within the Zamindari at that time.” 

2. “In village Dorra, Tehsil Fatechand, District Agra, a marriage 
party came to the house of Moti Ram Jatav from village Rampur. 

The bridegroom was wearing a glittering crown and the party also 
brought a band music and fireworks. The Caste Hindus objected to 
the party proceeding with the music band playing and displaying 
fireworks. Moti Ram protested against this and said that they were 
also as good human beings as any others. On this, the caste Hindus 
caught hold of Moti Ram and gave him a severe beating and also 
attacked the marriage party. A sum of Rs. 15-1-0 tied in Moti Ram’s 
turban was also removed.” 

3. “While a marriage party was on its way to the house of 
Prem Singh and Girvar Singh, Jatavs of village Khurva, Police post 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


54 


54 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Sakini, District Aligarh, it was prevented by the caste Hindus from 
proceeding further unless the music band stopped playing, and the 
procession was threatened to be killed and looted if the music was 
not stopped. Caste Hindus were also enraged for refusal by the Jatavs 
to do ‘Begar’ and for the audacity to have music band playing with 
a marriage party. On the marriage party’s refusal to stop music, 
the caste Hindus were so much enraged that they threw brick-bats 
and stones at the party.” 

The ‘ Hindustan Times’ of the 24th of March 1945 reports the following 
incident relating to the same subject: 

“A Shilpakar marriage party of the village of Dhanuri in Lands 
down sub-division carrying the bridegroom in a ‘palki’ was proceeding 
to the bride’s house in the village of Mall Dhangu. A man introducing 
himself as an agent of the Patwari of Mall Dhangu advised the 
party to go through an out of the way route to avoid ‘disturbance 
by caste Hindus. 

The party, accordingly, took a forest path and when they were 
at a lonely spot a whistle brought out about 200 caste Hindus who, 
it is alleged, attacked the party and carried away the ‘palki’. 

The Shilpakar party reached the bride’s house two days later 
and the marriage was, it is reported, performed in the presence of 
the Sub-divisional Magistrate and a police party brought by him. 

The Patwari has been suspended in this connection.” 

The Civil and Military Gazette of Lahore in its issue of 24th June 
1945 reports: 

“A party of Rajputs, armed with axes, lathis and daggers, attacked 
yesterday Harijans of a village in Gwalior State, killing one and 
inflicting serious injuries on four. 

The Rajputs and the Harijans of the village were on hostile terms 
for some time past ever since the Harijans took out a procession to 
celebrate the birth of an heir apparent to the Gwalior Darbar. The 
Rajputs strongly protested against it, as according to them, Harijans 
were not entitled to the privileges of such celebrations. 

Last month, a proclamation was issued by the Maharaja giving 
equal rights to the Harijans.” 

Here are a few cases to show how the Hindus treat with violence 
any attempt on the part of the Untouchables to imitate the ways and 
manners of the Hindus and to have a little pride in themselves. The 
following is from the ‘ Bombay Samachar ’ of 4th November 1936: 

“At Uttapalam (in Malabar) an Ezhava by caste named 
Sivaraman, aged 17, went to the shop of a caste Hindu to buy 
salt and asked in the Malayalam language for ‘uppu’. In Malabar, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


55 


UNTOUCHABILITY AND LAWLESSNESS 55 

according to custom, caste Hindus alone can use the word ‘uppu’ for 
salt; being only a Harijan he ought to have used the word ‘pulichatan’. 
Consequently, the high caste grocer was very angry and is alleged 
to have thrashed Sivaraman so severely that the latter died.” 

The following instances are collected from the ‘ Samata 

(1) “At Kathi (District Poona) the people have begun to persecute 
the Untouchables because the latter have begun saying ‘Ram, Ram 
and Namaskar’. Be it known to the unintimated that these are 
salutations which only the higher castes have the right to employ; 
the Mahars, etc. must say ‘Johar’ or ‘Paya Lagu’ (I touch your feet) 
to the people. 

(2) The Untouchables of Tanoo (District Poona) tried to 
behave ‘like Touchable Hindu people’; the result of this impudent 
encroachment is that many of them have had to leave the village 
and some have migrated to Bavda. 

(3) At Valapur (District of Sholapur) the Mahars are persecuted 
because they have dared to refuse to address Touchables as ‘Saheb’ 
and to say ‘Paya Lagu’ (‘I touch your feet’) in salutation. 

(4) At Jambad (District Sholapur) the Untouchables refused to 
make ‘Nautch’ and ‘Tamasha’ for the diversion of their Touchable 
lords. Therefore these Untouchables were thrashed, their huts were 
burnt down or pulled down, and they were driven out of the village, 
limits. 

(5) At Bavda (District Poona) some Untouchables exhorted their 
fellow-outcastes to give up eating the leavings of higher caste people, 
dead animals, etc., and to refuse to do the dirty work of the people. 

The elders of the village have told these Mahars with new fanglad 
notions that it is their ‘Dharma’ to eat what they have always been 
eating and do what they have been doing. Those Mahars who do not 
follow their ancient and eternal ‘Dharma’ have been thrashed by the 
people and threatened with expulsion from the village.” 

XII 

The Hindu treats the Untouchables as being born to serve the Hindu 
community. It being his duty to serve, the Untouchables cannot refuse 
to serve the Hindu whenever the latter call upon to do so. The Hindus 
of the village hold the belief that they can commandeer the labour of 
the Untouchables. The system is known as ‘ Begar or forced labour. A 
few instances will show that dire consequences follow from the refusal 
of the Untouchables to submit to the system. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


56 


56 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The ‘Jivan of December 1938 reports the following incidents: 

“On 29th November 1938, the Jatavs of village Kohana, district 
Muttra were seriously tortured by the Jats and Brahmins for refusing 
Begar. 

The Thakkurs and the Brahmins of this village used to extract 
Begar from the Jatavs and to harass them. The latter decided not 
to do Begar and do only that work for which wages were paid. 
Recently, a bullock died in the village and the Thakkurs and other 
caste Hindus tried to force the Jatavs to lift it, but they said that 
they could do that only if they were paid. This enraged the caste 
Hindus so much that they asked a sweeper to fill the Jatavs’ well 
with excreta and make them not to go to their fields for ablutions 
and decided to tease them in every way. When the Jatavs prevented 
the Sweeper from putting excreta in their well, he called the Jats, 
Thakkurs and Brahmins who were all ready for an attack. They 
attacked the Jatavs with lathis and seriously belaboured them and 
also set fire to their houses as a result of which six houses were 
burnt to ashes and 18 Jatavs were wounded seriously and a lot of 
their household property was taken away by the rowdies.” 

‘The same Journal in its issue of February 1939 reports: 

“The Jats of village Abhaipura, tehsil Kirvali, district Agra, are 
used to extract Begar (Forced labour) from the poor Scheduled Caste 
people and beat them on demanding wages. Some three months 
back Sukhi Jat forced Sukh Ram, Ghanshyam and Humka, Jatavs 
to do work for them and did not pay any wages. These persons are 
so much fed up with such high-handedness that they have left the 
villages and lived with their relatives in other villages, while their 
untensils and other household goods have been taken away by the 
Jats and concealed in some barn.” 

The ‘ Savadhan ’ in its issue of 3rd June 1945 reports the following 
incident: 

“Mehraji Kori, a Scheduled Caste woman has filed a complaint 
in the court of Mr. Mahboob Alam, City Magistrate under Sections 
376, 341 and 354-A against Brahma Singh, Suleman and Aftab, 
constables of Jubi Police post. It is alleged that at about 10-30 p.m. 
on 2nd May 1945 these three constables, Sumar, Kahar, Kallu Bibis 
son and some others came and searched her house and then took 
her to the police station and kept her there for the whole night. 

In the early hours of the morning these constables took her to a 
small room bolted it and then all three of them violated her modesty 
one by one. Then she was removed to another small room where 
charcoal and pieces of paper were filled in her private part and they 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


57 


UNTOUCHABILITY AND LAWLESSNESS 57 

put their private organs in her mouth. Her clothes were torn and 
saturated with blood. The following day her mother was forced to 
do begar work for the whole day and then both of them were left 
off at 10 p.m. 

Murala, wife of Maharaji’s husband’s younger brother has also filed 
a similar complaint. She has alleged that the same constables took her 
to the police post the same night and returned her to her house. On 
the way she was caught by Madari Teli, near Kumar Tola, to the ruins 
of a house and her modesty violated. Messrs. Munna Lai, Bhushan and 
Ram Bharose, advocates are appearing for the complainant.” 

In the ‘Hindustan Times’ of 15th April 1945 Occurs the following 
news item: 

“For refusal to do forced labour, it is alleged, a large number 
of Harijans in the village of Dukheri in Ambala District were 
recently assaulted by a party of Rajputs. A man and a woman, 
both Harijans, were killed. It is also alleged that a large number 
of houses belonging to Harijans were set on fire. Telegrams have 
been sent to the Commissioner and the Deputy Inspector General 
of Police to inquire into the matter.” 

From these instances, it will be clear to anyone that the Hindus do 
not hesitate to use violence to hold down the Untouchables and maintain 
the established order and even to commit murder. 

Mr. Lajpat Rai in his book ‘Unhappy India’ in which he tried to reply 
to and refute the charges levelled by Miss Mayo in her Mother India’ 
gives a lengthy and lucid description of the lynchings of the Negroes 
in the United States and the atrocities committed upon them by the 
members of the Ku Klux Klan and asks: 

“What however is very relevant to her to ask is: is the unjustifiable 
and cruel attitude of the Brahmins towards the Pariah more 
unjustifiable and more cruel than that of the Klansmen of America 
towards the Negroes?” 

“What are the caste cruelties of India put by the side of what 
the whiteman has done to the non-white people?” 

Lala Lajpatrai, if he had cared to investigate could have found 
that the cruelties and atrocities practised by the Hindus against the 
Untouchables were no less than those practised by the Americans upon 
the Negroes. If these atrocities are not so well known to the world as 
are those practised upon the Negro, it is not because they do not exist. 
They are not known because there is no Hindu who will not do his best 
to conceal truth in order to hide his shame. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


58 


58 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Some might think that this description of the Established Order 
and the rules made thereunder are matters of ancient past. This is a 
complete mistake. The Established Order subsists even today and the 
rules are as operative today as they were when they were made. This 
will be evident from the two following statements on the condition of 
the Untouchables which have appeared in the ‘ Hindustan Times’. The 
first appeared in the issue of 8th March 1945. The first one is written 
by one Kesarilalji Bordia, Headmaster of a school called Vidya Bhuwan 
in Udaipur. It reads as follows: 

“Many are the disabilities under which the Harijans in Mewar 
live. They cannot enter temples, nor can they draw water from public 
wells. They cannot join the caste Hindus in festivals and processions. 
They have to take out their Rath Yatra or Doll procession through a 
different route and on a different day. And they cannot ride through 
the village. 

Even silver ornaments, let alone gold ones on their person are 
resented by the caste Hindus. The result is, they have to content 
themselves with tin and brass articles. Age-old usage prevents them 
from using butter or gur in wedding feasts. 

In Schools and other public places, Harijan boys cannot sit with 
the children of caste Hindus. They are asked to absent themselves on 
the inspection day in order to save the Inspector from embarrassment. 

A memorandum has been submitted to the State Government. 

If the Government chooses to declare in unequivocal terms the 
disapproval of these disabilities, the hands of non-official bodies 
which are fighting untouchability will be strengthened.” 

The second is in the form of a statement issued by the President of 
the Harijan Sevak Sangh and refers to the condition of the Untouchables 
in the State of Mewar. It reads as under: 

“The Mewar Harijan Sevak Sangh has sent a Memorandum 
to the Mewar Government drawing their attention to the various 
disabilities of Harijans in the State and their consequent hardships. 

The Memorandum brings out how civil liberties of Harijans are 
curtailed in several ways by the orthodoxy and prejudices of caste 
Hindus. 

I enumerate below some of the unjust practices which still persist 
in the State and for the rectification of which the State has taken no 
effective measures. They are as follows: 

1. Harijans have no liberty in the selection of clothes to wear. The 

form of dress must follow the age-long pattern; personal tastes 

and desires have no place in the choice of the dress. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


59 


UNTOUCHABILITY AND LAWLESSNESS 59 

2. At wedding feasts they have no choice in the selection of food 
materials. Even on payment they cannot use costly articles. 

3. They cannot ride the village on a horse. 

4. They are not allowed accommodation in public vehicles. 

5. On religious festivals they cannot take out procession of their 
idols except through specified routes. 

6. They have no access to wells and temples.” 

The writer adds: 

“Three years ago in company with Thakkur Bapa, I travelled 
all over the State and placed before the Government and public my 
impressions of the conditions obtaining there and pleaded for reform. 

On perusal of the abovementioned memorandum and other reports 
sent to me, I find that the past few years have hardly brought any 
change and conditions are more or less static. 

It is heart-breaking to find that passage of time cuts no ice 
with us. The result is that there is hardly any change in our age- 
long practices and prejudices. This perversity which blinds us to 
the tyranny and injustices of our ways also makes us impervious 
to the incalculable harm we have already suffered as a result of it. 
Even if the ignorant prejudice of the common man is unshaken the 
enlightened Governments of the twentieth century ought to be more 
alive to their responsibilities.” 

The dates of these communications are important. They are of the 
year 1945. None can say that this Hindu Established Order is a thing of 
the ancient past. The fact that these latest accounts refer to the Indian 
States should not be understood to mean that the established Order has 
vanished from British India. The chapters to follow will present enough 
evidence to show that the same Established Order is very much alive 
in British India. 

In the ‘ Times of India ’ of 31st August 1950 occurs the following 
news item: 

“The following facts of a case revealed in the hearing of an appeal 
in the Allahabad High Court, are illustrative of the socio-economic 
conditions of lower castes in the rural areas: 

Chiranji, a dhobi of the village of Sarras in the District of Etah, 
went out as a military employee in the last war and remained out 
of his village for four or five years. When he was discharged, he 
returned to his home. He stopped washing clothes and used to go 
about in the village in his military uniform. This coupled with the 
fact that he refused to wash clothes even for the men of the Raja of 
Sarras the sole zamindar in the village, was resented by the villagers. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


60 


60 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

On December 31, 1947, when the dhobi was washing his clothes, 
four villagers, including the Raja’s servants, approached him and 
asked him to wash their clothes which he refused. The villagers took 
Chiranji to the Raja’s house and gave him a beating. His mother 
and mother’s sister went there to intercede on his behalf but they 
too were assaulted. 

The attackers then went away leaving Chiranji in the custody 
of one Ram Singh; finding him alone, Chiranji was alleged to have 
slapped him and run away. Ram Singh and other servants of the 
Raja chased him to his house where he had taken shelter. The 
villagers insisted upon his opening the door but when there was no 
response, his house was set on fire. A number of other huts were 
also reduced to ashes. 

The dhobi lodged a complaint with the Police who disbelieved his 
story and wanted to prosecute him for a false report. He then filed 
a complaint in a Magistrate’s Court. The accused were convicted 
and sentenced to three years’ imprisonment each. The High Court 
upheld the sentences imposed by the Magistrate. 

The following news item has appeared in the ‘Indian News Chronicle’ 
dated 31st August 1950. 

Inhuman Treatment towards Harijans in Pepsu: Depressed Classes 
League’s Memorandum to Government. 

Patiala, August 1950: “The unprovoked thrashing of the Backward 
Class people, inhuman insults heaped upon their women folk, 
indiscriminate ejectment of the Harijans from the lands, the virtual 
confinement of the Harijans and their cattle in their mud houses 
for days together without any fault is a long tale of suffering whose 
echoes are rising in proportion to the diminishing echoes of crime in 
general,” says a memorandum presented by the PEPSU Provincial 
Depressed Classes League to the State Government. 

“While crime in PEPSU is on the decrease due to the vigorous 
efforts of the police,” the memorandum adds, “it is a pity that the 
sector of the Backward Class should be deprived of the protection 
from the un-social elements”. The Backward Classes economically 
handicapped as they are, find it very difficult to ventilate their 
day-to-day grievances to the authorities concerned who could 
immediately come to their rescue, and are perforce, compelled to 
submit to their lot, to the encouragement of the aggressor, and thus 
the wail of disgust against the present state of affairs grows still 
louder which in its turn is made stock of by the interested parties.” 

The Provincial Depressed Classes League further quoted an 
instance to show how much inhuman treatment was being meted out 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


61 


UNTOU CHABILITY AND LAWLESSNESS 61 

to Harijans in PEPSU. Chand Singh a Harijan of village Katu, 
district Bernala, was made to go round the village on the back of 
donkey with face blackened for the fault of having drunk water at 
the well of a high caste zamindar. “ In the changed atmosphere 
of free India, the members of the Scheduled Castes in the PEPSU 
are daily finding themselves put in a tight corner as a result of 
the unprecedented repression let loose upon them by the members 
of high castes.” 

The Provincial Depressed Classes League has further suggested 
formation of district and central special commissions in the State 
with wide powers to deal with the complaints on Harijans on the 
spot and afford them other facilities. 

Concluding, the League has urged upon the State Government 
that pending an all-India enactment in this connection, it may, 
temporarily be provided that the Harijans have equal rights in the 
village common, to ease the situation from further deterioration. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


62 


Chapter 7 

WHY LAWLESSNESS IS LAWFUL? 


The foregoing discussion must have made clear two things which 
must be borne in mind. One is the sharp division between the touchables 
and untouchables, the other is the deep antagonism between the two. 

Every village has two parts, the quarters of the touchables and the 
quarters of the untouchables. Geographically the two are separate. There 
is always appreciable distance between the two. At any rate there is 
no contiguity or proximity between them. The untouchables quarters 
have a distinct name such as Maharwada, Mangwada, Chamrotti, 
Khatkana, etc. De jure for the purposes of Revenue Administration or 
Postal Communication, the quarters of the untouchables are included in 
the village. But de-facto it is separate from the village. When the Hindu 
resident of a village speaks of the village he means to include in it only 
the caste Hindu residents and the locality occupied by them. Similarly 
when the untouchable speaks of the village he means to exclude from 
it the untouchables and the quarters they occupy. Thus in every village 
the touchables and untouchables form two separate groups. There is 
nothing common between them. They do not constitute a folk. This is 
the first thing which must be noted. 

The second thing to note with regard to this division of the village 
into two groups is that these groups are real corporations which 
no one included within them can escape. As has been well said the 
American or European belongs to groups of various kinds, but he 
“joins” most of them. He of course is born into a family, but he does 
not stay in it all his life unless he pleases. He may choose his own 
occupation, residence, wife, political party, and is responsible generally 
speaking for no one’s acts but his own. He is an “individual” in 


This essay has been received from Shri S. S. Rege. It is included here 
as the title is identical with the earlier chapter and also seems to be 
continuation of the discussion in the said chapter. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


63 


WHY LAWLESSNESS IS LAWFUL? 63 

a much fuller sense because all his relationships are settled by himself 
for himself. The touchables or untouchables are in no sense individuals 
because all or nearly all of his relationship are fixed when he is born in 
a certain group. His occupation, his dwelling, his gods and his politics 
are all determined for him by the group to which he belongs. When 
the touchables and untouchables meet they meet not as man to man, 
individual to individual but as members of groups or as nationals of 
two different States. 

This fact has an important effect upon the mutual relationship 
between the touchables and untouchables in a village. The relationship 
resembles the relationship between different clans in primitive society. 
In primitive society the member of the clan has a claim, but the stranger 
has no standing. He may be treated kindly, as a guest, but he cannot 
demand “justice” at the hands of any clan but his own. The dealing of 
clan with clan is a matter of war or negotiation, not of law; and the 
clanless man is an ‘outlaw’, in fact as well as in name and lawlessness 
against the strangers is therefore lawful. The untouchable not being a 
member of the group of touchables is a stranger. He is not a kindred. 
He is an outlaw. He cannot claim justice. He cannot claim rights which 
the touchable is bound to respect. 

The third thing to note is that the relationship between the two, the 
touchables and the untouchables, has been fixed. It has become a matter of 
status. This status has unmistakably given the untouchables a position of 
inferiority vis-a-vis the touchables. This inferiority is embodied in a Code 
of Social conduct to which the untouchables must conform. What kind of 
a code it is, has already been stated. The untouchable is not willing to 
conform to that Code. He is not prepared to render unto Ceasar what 
belongs to Ceasar. The untouchable wants to have his relationship with 
the touchables by contract. The touchable wants the untouchables to live 
in accordance with the rules of status and not rise above it. Thus the 
two halves of the village, the touchables and the untouchables are now 
struggling for resettling what the touchable thinks is settled for ever. 
The conflict is centered round one question — What is to be the basis of 
this relationship? Shall it be contract or shall it be status? 

This raises some very interesting questions. How did the untouchables 
come to have the status of the lowliest and the low? Why has the Hindu 
cultivated this hostility and contempt for the untouchables? Why does 
the Hindu indulge in lawlessness in suppressing the untouchables as 
though such lawlessness is lawful? 

To give an adequate answer to these questions one has to go to the 
law of the Hindus. Without a working knowledge of the rules of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


64 


64 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Hindu Law, it would be impossible to give any satisfactory answer to 
this question. For our purpose, it is not necessary to cover the whole 
field of Hindu Law in all its branches. It is enough to know that branch 
of the Hindu law which may be called the law of persons — or to put 
it in non-technical language — that part of the Hindu law which deals 
with differences of right, duty or capacity which result from differences 
of status. 

It is therefore proposed to give a catalogue of the rules of the Hindu 
Law which relate to the law of persons. These rules are collected from 
the Law Books of Manu, Yajnavalkya, Narada, Vishnu, Katyayana etc. 
who are some of the principal law givers recognised by the Hindus as 
persons having authority to lay down the law. A mere reproduction of 
the rules however interesting cannot be helpful in enabling a person 
who goes through them to have an idea of the basic conceptions which 
underlie the Hindu Law of Persons. For that purpose mere reproduction 
of the rules will not do. Some order is evidently necessary. What is 
therefore done is to group these rules under certain heads. The whole 
thing is cast in the form of a digest divided into sections, each section 
being an assembly of rules dealing with one definite matter. 

DIFFERENT CLASSES : THEIR ORIGIN AND THEIR DUTIES 

1. This (Universe) existed in the shape of Darkness, unperceived 
destitute of distinctive marks, untenable by reasoning, unknowable, 
wholly immersed, as it were in a deep sleep.” 

2. Then the divine self existent (Svayambhu, himself) indiscernible 
(but) making (all) this, the great elements and the rest, discernible, 
appeared with irresistible (creative) power, dispelling the darkness. 

3. But for the sake of the prosperity of the worlds, he caused the 
Brahmana, the Kshatriya, the Vaishya, and the Shudra to proceed 
from his mouth, his arms, his thighs and his feet. 

4. But in order to protect this Universe He, the most resplendant 
one, assigned separate (duties and) occupations to those who 
sprang from his mouth, arms, thighs and feet. 

5. To the Brahmans he assigned teaching and studying (the veda), 
sacrificing (performing sacrificial ceremonies) for their own benefit 
and for others, giving and accepting (of alms). 

6. The Kshatriya he commanded to protect the people, to bestow 
gifts, to offer sacrifices, to study (the Veda), and to abstain from 
attaching himself to sensual pleasures. 

(I) Manu 1.5; (2) Ibid., 1.6; (3) Ibid., 1.31; (4) Ibid., 87; (5) Ibid., 1.88; (6) Ibid.. 1.89. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


65 


WHY LAWLESSNESS IS LAWFUL? 65 

7. The Vaishya to tend cattle, to bestow gifts, to offer sacrifices, to 
study (the Veda), to trade, to lend money and to cultivate the land. 

8. One occupation only the lord prescribed to the Shudra, to serve 
meekly even these (other) three castes. 

9. A student, an apprentice, a hired servant, and fourthly, an official: 
these must be regarded as labourers. Slaves are those who are 
born in the house and the rest. 

10. The Sages have distinguished five sorts of attendants according to 
law. Among these are four sorts of labourers (mentioned above). The 
slaves (are the fifth category, of which there are) fifteen species. 

11. One born at (his master’s) house; one purchased; one received (by 
gift); one obtained by inheritance; one maintained during a general 
famine; one pledged by his rightful owner. 

12. One released from a heavy debt; one made captive in a fight; one 
won through a wager; one who has come forward declaring ‘I am 
thine’ an apostate from asceticism; one enslaved for a stipulated 
period. 

13. One who has become a slave in order to get a maintenance; one 
enslaved on account of his connection with a female slave; and 
oneself sold. These are fifteen classes of slaves as declared in law. 

14. Among these the four named first cannot be released from bondage, 
except by the favour of their owners. Their bondage is hereditary. 

15. The Sages have declared that the state of dependence is common to 
all these; but that their respective position and an income depends 
on their particular caste & occupation. 

EQUALITY BEFORE LAW 

1. When two persons abuse each other, their punishment shall be 
equal if they are equals in caste; if one is inferior to the other, his 
punishment shall be double; for a superior, half (of the ordinary 
punishment) is ordained. 

2. When persons equal in caste and qualities abuse one another, the 
punishment ordained for them in the system of law is thirteen 
Panas and a half. 

3. For a Brahman abusing a Kshatriya, the fine shall be half a 
hundred (Fifty Panas); for abusing a Vaishya, half of fifty (twenty- 
five Panas); for abusing a Shudra, twelve & a half. 

(7) Manu 1.90; (8) Ibid,., 1.91: (9) Narad V. 3; (10) Ibid., V.2; (11) Ibid., V.26: (12) 
Ibid., V.27; (13) Ibid., V.28; (14) Ibid., V. 29; (15) Ibid. V. 4. 

(1) Brihaspati XX.5; (2) Ibid., XX.6; (3) Ibid., XX.7. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


66 


66 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

4. This punishment has been declared for (abusing) a virtuous 
Shudra who has committed no wrong; no offence is imputable to 
a Brahman for abusing (a Shudra) devoid of virtue. 

5. A Vaishya shall be fined a hundred (Panas) for reviling a Kshatriya, 
a Kshatriya reviling a Vaishya shall have to pay half of that 
amount as a fine. 

6. In the case of a Kshatriya reviling a Shudra, the fine shall be 
twenty Panas; in the case of a Vaishya, the double amount is 
declared to be the proper fine by persons learned in law. 

7. A Shudra shall be compelled to pay the first fine for abusing a 
Vaishya; the middling fine (for abusing) a Kshatriya; the highest 
fine (for abusing) a Brahman. 

8. A Kshatriya having defamed a Brahmana shall be fined one 
hundred (panas); a Vaishya one hundred and fifty or two hundred; 
a Shudra shall suffer corporal punishment. 

9. A Brahmana shall be fined fifty (panas) for defaming a Kshatriya; 
in (the case of) a Vaishya the fine shall be twenty-five panas; in 
(the case of) a Shudra twelve. 

10. A once born man (a Shudra), who insults a twice born man with 
gross invective, shall have his tongue cut out; for he is of low 
origin. 

11. If he mentions the names and castes (Jati) of the (twice-born) 
with contumely an iron nail, ten fingers long, shall be thrust red 
hot into his mouth. 

12. If he arrogantly teaches Brahmans their duty, the King shall 
cause hot oil to be poured into his mouth and into his ears. 

13. For mutual abuse by a Brahmana and a Kshatriya a fine must 
be imposed by a discerning (King), on the Brahmana the lowest 
amercement, but on the Kshatriya the middle most. 

14. With whatever limb a man of a low caste does hurt to (a man 
of three) highest (castes) even that limb shall be cut off; that is 
the teaching of Manu. 

15. He (low caste man) who raises his hand or a stick, shall have 
his hand cut off; he who in anger kicks with his foot, shall have 
his foot cut off. 

16. A low caste man who tries to place himself on the same seat 
with a man of a high caste, shall be branded on his hip and be 
banished, or (the King) shall cause his buttock to be gashed. 

(4) Brahaspati XX.8: (5) Ibid., XX.9: (6) Ibid., XX. 10: (7) Ibid., XX.11: (8) Manu 
VIII. 267: (9) Ibid. 268: (10) Ibid., VIII.270: (II) Ibid., VIII.271: (12) Ibid., VIII.272: (13) 
Ibid., V1II.276; (14) Ibid., VIII.279: (15) Ibid., VIII.280; (16) Ibid., VIII. 281. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


67 


WHY LAWLESSNESS IS LAWFUL? 67 

17. If out of arrogance he spits (on a superior) the King shall cause 
both his lips to be cut off, if he urinates (on him), the penis; if 
he breaks wind (against him) the anus. 

18. If he lays hold of the hair (of a superior), let the (King) 
unhesitatingly cut off his hands, likewise (if he takes him by the 
feet) the beard, the neck or the scrotum. 

STATUS, DIGNITY AND POSITION OF EACH CLASS 

1. Man is stated to be purer above the navel (than below); hence 
the self existent (Swayambhu) has declared the purest (part) of 
him to be his mouth. 

2. As the Brahmana sprang from the mouth, as he was the first- 
born and as he possesses the Veda, he is by right the lord of his 
whole creation. 

3. For the self existent (Swayambhu) having performed austerities, 
produced him first from his own mouth, in order that the offerings 
might be conveyed to the gods and manes and that this universe 
might be preserved. 

4. What created being can surpass him, through whose mouth the 
gods continually consume the sacrificial viands and the manes 
the offerings of the dead. 

5. Of created beings the most excellent are said to be those who are 
animated; of the animated, those who subsist by intelligence; of 
the intelligent mankind, and of men the Brahmanas. 

6. A Brahmana coming into existence is born as the highest on 
earth, the lord of all created things. 

7. Whatever exists in the world is the property of the Brahmana; on 
account of the excellence of his origin the Brahmana is indeed, 
entitled to all. 

8. A Brahmana be he ignorant or learned is a great divinity, just 
as the fire, whether carried forth (for the performance of a burnt 
oblation) or not carried forth, is a great divinity. 

9. Thus though Brahmans employ themselves in all (sorts of) mean 
occupations, they must be honoured in every way; for (each of) 
them is a great divinity. 

10. But let (the father perform or) cause to be performed the 
Namadheya (the right of naming the child) on the tenth or twelfth 
(day after birth), or on a lucky lunar day, in a lucky Muhurta, 
under an auspicious constellation. 

(17) Maim V111.282: (18) Ibid., VIII.283. 

(1) Manu 1.92: (2) Ibid., 1.93: (3) Ibid., 1.94: (4) Ibid., 1.95: (5) Ibid., 1.96: (6) Ibid., 
1.99: (7) Ibid., 1.100: (8) Ibid., IX.317: (9) Ibid., IX.319: (10) Ibid. 11.30. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


68 


68 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

11. Let (the first part of) a Brahman’s name (denote something) 
auspicious, a Kshatriya’s be connected with power, and a Vaishya’s 
with wealth, but a Shudra’s (express something) contemptible. 

12. (The second part of) a Brahmana’s (name) shall be (a word) 
implying happiness, of a Kshatriya’s (a word) implying protection, 
of a Vaishya’s (a term) expressive of thriving and of a Shudra’s (an 
expression) denoting service. 

13. Let him (a Brahmana) not dwell in a country where the rulers are 
Shudras, nor in one which is surrounded by unrighteous men, nor 
in one which has become subject to heretics, nor in one swarming 
with men of the lowest castes. 

14. When the King cannot himself decide the causes (of litigants) then he 
should appoint thereto a Brahmana learned in the various Shastras. 

15. Where a Brahmana (endowed with the qualities enumerated) cannot 
be had (the King) should appoint a Kshatriya or a Vaishya, proficient 
in the Sacred law, but the (the King) should carefully avoid a Shudra 
as a Judge. 

16. Whatever is done by others (as Judges) than these must be regarded 
as done wrongly, even if they be officers (of the King) and even if 
by chance the decision is according to the Sacred texts. 

17. A Brahmana who subsists only by the name of his caste (Jati), or 
one who merely calls himself a Brahmana (though his origin be 
uncertain), may, at the King’s pleasure interpret the law to him, 
but never a Shudra. 

The Kingdom of that Monarch, who looks on while a Shudra settles 
the law, will sink (low), like a cow in a morass. 

A Brahmana who knows the law need not bring any (offence) to 
the notice of the King, by his own power alone he can punish those 
men who injure him. 

His own power is greater than the power of the King; the Brahmana 
therefore, may punish his foes by his own power alone. 

The Brahmana is declared (to be) the creator (of the world), the 
punisher, the teacher, (and hence) a benefactor (of all created beings); 
to him let no man say anything unpropitious, nor use any harsh 
words. 

INTER-RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE CLASSES 

I 

1. In the inverse order of the four castes slavery is not ordained. 

(11) Manu 11.31; (12) Ibid., 11.32; (13) Ibid., IV. 61; (14) Katyayana 63; (15) Ibid., 67; 

(16) Ibid., 68; (17) Manu VI1I.20; (18) Ibid., VIII.21; (19) Ibid., XI.31; (20) Ibid., XI.32; 

(21) Ibid., XI. 35. 

(1) Narada V.39. 


18. 

19. 

20 . 
21 . 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


69 


WHY LAWLESSNESS IS LAWFUL? 69 

2. Members of three Varnas can become slaves but a Brahman can 
never become a slave. Slavery in the case of the (three) Varnas 
viz., Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras is in their direct order 
and not in their inverse order. A Shudra could be the slave of 
any master of the four castes, a Vaishya of any master of the 
first three castes but not of a Shudra Master, a Kshatriya could 
be the slave of a Brahman or Kshatriya Master but not of a 
Vaishya or Shudra Master. 

3. Even one of the same caste (i.e. a Brahman) should not make a 

Brahmana work as a Slave A man who is Kshatriya, Vaishya 

or Shudra may occasionally do the work of slave for a man of the 
same caste (as his own) but a Brahman should never be made 
to do the work of a slave. 

II 

4. For the first marriage of twice born men (wives) of equal caste 
are recommended; but for those who through desire proceed (to 
marry again) the following females (chosen) according to the 
(direct) order (of the castes), are most approved. 

5. It is declared that a Shudra woman alone (can be) the wife of a 
Shudra, she and one of his own caste (the wives) of a Vaishya, 
those two and one of his own caste (the wives) of a Kshatriya, 
those three and one of his own caste (the wives) of a Brahmana. 

6. If twice born men wed women of their own and of other (lower 
castes), the seniority, honour and habitation of those (wives) must 
be (settled) according to the order of the castes (Varna). 

7. Among all (twice born men) the wife of equal caste alone, not a 
wife of a different caste by any means, shall personally attend 
her husband and assist him in his daily sacred rights. 

8. A Shudra who has inter-course with a woman of a twice born 
caste, guarded or unguarded (shall be punished in the following 
manner); if she was unguarded, he loses the part (offending) and 
all his property; if she was guarded, everything (even his life). 

9. (For inter-course with a guarded Brahmani) a Vaishya shall forfeit 
all his property after imprisonment for a year; a Kshatriya shall 
be fined one thousand (panas) and be shaved with the urine (of 
an ass). 

10. If a Vaishya or a Kshatriya has connexion with an unguarded 
Brahmani, let him fine the Vaishya five hundred (panas) and the 
Kshatriya one thousand. 

(2) Katyayana 715-716: (3) Ibid,., 717-718: (4) Manu 111.12: (5) Ibid., 111.13: (6) Ibid., 
IX.85: (7) Ibid., IX.86: (8) Ibid., VIII.374: (9) Ibid., VIII.375: (10) Ibid., VIII. 376. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


70 


70 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

11. If a Vaishya approaches a guarded female of the Kshatriya caste, 
or a Kshatriya a (guarded) Vaishya woman, they both deserve 
the same punishment as in the case of an unguarded Brahmana 
female. 

12. A Brahmana shall be compelled to pay a fine of one thousand 
(panas) if he has inter-course with guarded (females of) those 
two (castes); for (offending with) a (guarded) Shudra female a 
fine of one thousand (panas shall be inflicted) on a Kshatriya or 
a Vaishya. 

13. For (intercourse with) an unguarded Kshatriya (female) a fine of 
five hundred (panas shall fall) on a Vaishya; but (for the same 
offence) a Kshatriya shall be shaved with the urine (of a donkey) 
or (pay) the same fine. 

14. A Brahmana who approaches unguarded females (of the) Kshatriya 
or Vaishya (castes), or a Shudra female, shall be fined five hundred 
(panas); but (for intercourse with) a female (of the) lowest (castes), 
one thousand. 

Ill 

15. But let (a house holder) offer, in accordance with the rule, to a 
guest who has come (of his own accord) a seat and water, as well 
as food, garnished (with seasoning) according to his ability. 

16. But a Kshatriya (who comes) to the house of a Brahman is not 
called a guest (atithi), nor a Vaishya, nor a Shudra, nor a personal 
friend, nor a relative, nor the teacher. 

17. But if a Kshatriya comes to the house of a Brahman in the 
manner of a guest, (the householder) may feed him according to 
his desire, after the Brahmans have eaten. 

18. Even a Vaishya and a Shudra who have approached his house 
in the manner of quests, he may allow to eat with his servants, 
showing (thereby) his compassionate disposition. 

DUTIES— PRIVILEGES— IMMUNITIES— DISABILITIES 

(I) 

1. Brahmans who are intent on the means (of gaining union with) 
Brahman and firm in (discharging) their duties, shall live by 
duly performing the following six acts, (which are enumerated) 
in their (proper) order. 

(11) Manu VIII. 382: (12) Ibid., VIII.383: (13) Ibid., VIII.384: (14) Ibid., VIII. 385: (15) 
Ibid., 111.99: (16) Ibid., III. 110: (17) Ibid., III.lll: (18) Ibid., 111.112. 

(1) Manu X.74. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


71 


WHY LAWLESSNESS IS LAWFUL? 


71 


2. Teaching, studying, sacrificing for himself, sacrificing for others, 
making gifts and receiving them are the six acts (prescribed) for 
a Brahmana. 

3. But among the six acts (ordained) for him three are his means 
of subsistence, (viz.) sacrificing for others, teaching and accepting 
gifts from pure men. 

4. (Passing) from the Brahman to the Kshatriya, three acts 
(incumbent on the former) are forbidden (viz.,) teaching, sacrificing 
for others, and thereby, the acceptance of gifts. 

5. The same are likewise forbidden to a Vaishya that is a settled 
rule; for Manu, the lord of creatures (Prajapati), has not prescribed 
them for (men of) those two (castes). 

6. To carry arms for striking and for throwing (is prescribed) for 
Kshatriyas as a means of subsistence; to trade, (to rear) cattle, 
and agriculture for Vaishyas; but their duties are liberality, the 
study of the Veda and the performance of sacrifices. 

7. Among the several occupations the most commendable are, teaching 
the Veda for a Brahamana, protecting the people for a Kshatriya 
and trade for a Vaishya. 

8. The service of Brahmanas alone is declared (to be) an excellent 
occupation for a Shudra; for whatever else besides this he may 
perform will bear him no fruit. 

(II) 

9. But a Brahmana unable to subsist by his peculiar occupations 
just mentioned, may live according to the law applicable to the 
Kshatriyas; for the latter is next to him in rank. 

10. If it be asked “How shall it be, if he cannot maintain himself 
by either (of these occupations? the answer is) he may adopt a 
Vaishya’s mode of life, employing himself in agriculture, and 
rearing cattle. 

11. A Kshatriya who has fallen into distress may subsist by these 
means (open to the Vaishya). 

12. A Vaishya who is unable to subsist by his own duties, may even 
maintain himself by a Shudra’s mode of life, avoiding (however) 
acts forbidden (to him), and he should give it up, when he is able 
to do so. 

13. But a Shudra being unable to find service with the twice-born and 
threatened with the loss of his sons and wife (through hunger), 
may maintain himself by handicrafts. 

(2) Manu X.75; (3) Ibid., X.76; (4) Ibid., X.77; (5) Ibid., X.78: (6) Ibid., X.79; (7) Ibid., 
X.80; (8) Ibid., X.123: (9) Ibid., X.81; (10) Ibid. X.82: (11) Ibid., X.95; (12) Ibid., X.98; (13) 
Ibid., X.99. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


72 


72 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(in) 

14. A Kshatriya must never arrogantly adopt the mode of life 
(prescribed for his) betters (that is for the Brahmanas). 

15. (The King) should order a Vaishya to trade, to lend money, to 
cultivate the land, to lend cattle and the Shudra to serve the 
twice born castes. 

16. (The King) should carefully compel Vaishyas and Shudras to 
perform the work (prescribed) for them; for if these two (castes) 
swerved from their duties, they would throw this (whole) world 
into confusion. 

(IV) 

1. A blind man, an idiot, (a cripple) who moves with the help of a 
board, a man full seventy years old, and he who confers benefits 
on Srotriyas, shall not be compelled by any (king) to pay a tax. 

2. Though dying (with want) a King must not levy a tax on Srotriyas, 
and no Srotriya residing in his kingdom must perish from hunger. 

3. Let the King make the common inhabitants of his realm who live 
by traffic, pay annually some trifle, which is called a tax. 

4. Mechanics and artisans, as well as Shudras who subsist by manual 
labour, he (the king) may cause to work (for himself) one (day) 
in each month. 

5. Tonsure (of the head) is ordained for a Brahmana (instead of 
capital punishment); but men of other castes shall suffer capital 
punishment. 

6. Let him (the King) never slay a Brahmana though he have 
committed all (possible) crimes; let him banish such an (offender) 
leaving all his property (to him) and (his body) unhurt. 

7. No greater crime is known on the earth than slaying a Brahmana: 
a King, therefore, must not even conceive in his mind the thought 
of killing a Brahmana. 

8. When a learned Brahmana has found treasure deposited in former 
(times), he may take even the whole (of it); for he is master for 
everything. 

9. When the King finds treasutre of old concealed in the ground, let 
him give one half to the Brahmanas and place the (other) half 
in his treasury. 

(14) Manu X.95; (15) Ibid,., VIII. 410: (16) Ibid., V111.4I8. 

(1) Manu VIII. 394: (2) Ibid., VII.133: (3) Ibid., VII. 137: (4) Ibid., VII.138: (5) Ibid., 
VIII. 379: (6) Ibid., VIII.380: (7) Ibid., VIII.381: (8) Ibid., VIII.37: (9) Ibid., VIII.38. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


73 


WHY LAWLESSNESS IS LAWFUL? 73 

MODE OF LIFE 

1. (A Shudra who is) pure, the servant of his betters, gentle in 
his speech, and free from pride, and always seeks a refuge with 
Brahmanas, attains (in the next life) a higher caste. 

2. But let a Shudra serve Brahmanas, either for the sake of heaven, 
or with a view to both (this life and the next); for he who is called 
the servant of a Brahmana thereby gains all his ends. 

3. If a Shudra (unable to subsist by serving Brahmanas) seeks 
a livelihood, he may serve Kshatriyas, or he may also seek to 
maintain himself by attending on a wealthy Vaishya. 

4. They must allot to him out of their own family (property) a 
suitable maintenance, after considering his ability, his industry, 
and the number of those whom he is bound to support. 

5. The remnants of their food must be given to him, as well as, 
their old clothes, the refuse of their grain and their old household 
furniture . 

6. No collection of wealth must be made by a Shudra, even though 
he be able (to do it); for a Shudra who has acquired wealth, gives 
pain to the Brahamana. 

7. Shudras who live according to the law, shall each month shave 
(their heads); their mode of purification (shall be) the same as 
that of Vaishyas and their food the fragments of an Aryan’s 
meal. As has been said the society for which the ancient law 
givers laid down their ordinances consisted of two parts — one 
part consisted of those who were comprised within the system of 
Chaturvarna. The other part consisted of those who were without 
the pale of Chaturvarna. They are spoken of in Manu as Bahyas 
i.e. outside the pale of Chaturvarna. They are spoken of as low 
castes. The origin of these low castes is a subject with which 
I am not concerned for the moment. It is enough to say that 
according to these ancient law givers of Hindus these low castes 
are the result of the progeny of intermarriages between those four 
classes — the Brahmanas-Kshatriyas-Vaishyas-Shudras — who are 
included within the system of Chaturvarna. How far this is true 
will be examined at another time. We are primarily concerned 
with social relationship and not with origin. So far the ordinances 
relating to those who were within the Chaturvarna have been 
given. It now remains to give the ordinances which relate to those 
who were outside the Chaturvarna or who were called the low 
castes. The ordinances which regulate the life of the low castes 
are strange to say very few. Few though they be they give them 
such a short shrift that one does not find any necessity for more 
detailed code of ordinances. They are as follows : 

(1) Manu IX.335; (2) Ibid., X.122; (3) Ibid., X.121: (4) Ibid., X.124; (5) Ibid., X.125; 

(6) Ibid., X.129: (7) Ibid., V.140. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


74 


74 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

1. All those tribes in this world, which are excluded from (the 
community of) those born from the mouth, the arms, the thighs, 
and the feet (of Brahman), are called Dasyus, whether they speak 
the language of the Mlenchhas (barbarians) or that of the Aryans. 

2. Near well-known trees and burial ground, on mountains and in 
groves, let these (tribes) dwell, known (by certain marks), and 
subsisting by their peculiar occupations. 

3. But the dwelling of the Chandalas and Shwapakas shall be outside 
the village, they must be made Apapatras and their wealth (shall 
be) dogs and donkeys. 

4. Their dress (shall be) the garments of the dead, (they shall eat) 
their food from broken dishes, black iron (shall be) their ornaments, 
they must always wander from place to place. 

5. A man who fulfils a religious duty, shall not seek intercourse 
with them; their transactions (shall be) among themselves, and 
their marriages with their equals. 

6. Their food shall be given to them by others (than an Aryan giver) 
in a broken dish; at night they shall not walk about in villages 
and in towns. 

7. By day they must go about for the purpose of their work, 
distinguished by marks at the King’s command, and they shall 
carry out the corpses (of persons) who have no relatives, that is 
a settled rule. 

8. By the King’s order they shall always execute the Criminals in 
accordance with the law, and they shall take for themselves the 
clothes, the beds and the ornaments of (such) criminals. 

9. He who has had connection with a woman of one of the lowest 
castes shall be put to death. 

10. If one who (being a member of the Chandala or some other low 
caste) must not be touched, intentionally defiles by his touch one 
who (as a member of a twice born caste) may be touched (by 
other twice born persons only) he shall be put to death. 

• • 


(1) Manu X.45 (2) Ibid., X.50; (3) Ibid., X.51; (4) Ibid., X.52; (5) Ibid., X.53; (6) Ibid., 
X.54; (7) Ibid., X.55. (8) Ibid., X.56; (9) Vishnu V.43: (10) Vishnu V.104. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


75 


PART III 

Roots of the Problem 

Chapter 8 

PARALLEL CASES 


I. Slavery in Rome. II. Villeinage in England. III. Jews and Servility. 
IV. Negroes and slavery. 

Social inequality is not confined to Hindus only. It prevailed in other 
countries also and was responsible for dividing society into higher and 
lower, free and unfree, respectable and despised. It would be interesting 
to compare the condition and status of the untouchables in India with 
the condition and status of the unfree and the despised classes in other 
countries ancient and modern. For an intelligent understanding of the 
differences and similarities it is essential to have some idea of the history 
of such parallel cases before any comparison can be instituted. It is not 
possible to give a survey of all such classes in all parts of the world. Nor 
is it necessary. A few typical cases can only be taken as illustrations. 

In studying the relationship between the Hindus and the Untouchables 
three questions at once come to one’s mind. Why has untouchability 
not vanished? Why does the Hindu regard lawlessness against the 
Untouchables as legitimate and lawful? Why does the Hindu feel no 
qualms of conscience in his dealings with the Untouchables? 

I 

Classes which like the Untouchables were lowly and despised have 
at one time existed in other societies also. For instance, they existed in 
once ancient Rome. The population of ancient Rome fell into five classes: 
(1) Patricians, (2) Plebians, (3) Clients, (4) Slaves and (5) Freemen. 

The Patricians were the ruling class. They were the civics in every 
sense. The rest were all servile in status. The Plebs and the Clients were 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


76 


76 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

destroyed by war. Those of the new comers who invoked the protection 
of the heads of Patrician families of repute and were ready to become 
their vassals were known as clients. Those who were too independent 
to brook submission to a private patron put themselves under the direct 
protection of the sovereign and became royal tenants and were known 
as Plebians. The Plebians had the right to hold property both movable 
and immovable to transfer it by quirtian modes of conveyance, and to 
have the protection for it of the tribunals. But the Plebian had no share 
in the Government of the City. He was a half-fledged citizen — civies sine 
suffragio. The Plebs were denied any participation in the religion of the 
city and as men to whom the suspicia were incompetent, any intermarriage 
between the Patrician and the Plebian was out of question. The client 
had to look to his Patrician patron for support and maintenance. The 
Patrician patron had to provide all that was necessary for his sustenance 
and that of his wife and children. This relation was a hereditary one, a 
client passed on from father to son. The client had not only to depend 
upon his Patrician patron for his maintenance but he had also to depend 
upon him for his legal protection. Not being a civic, a client had no right 
of suit and his Patrician patron had to assist his client in his redress 
for him for his injuries and represent him before the tribunals when he 
became involved in litigation. 

As to the slaves there were millions of them. A single rich landholder 
might own hundreds and even thousands, and it was a poor man that 
did not have several at least. They were just things to be owned. They 
were not persons in the eye of the law and had therefore no rights. They 
received kind treatment from a few humane masters. But generally they 
were treated with the greatest cruelty. “If a slave coughs or sneezes 
during a meal, if he lets a key fall noisy to the floor, we fall into a great 

rage often we strike too hard and shatter a limb or break a tooth,” 

said Senecca. One rich Roman used to punish his slaves for carelessness 
by casting them into a fish pond as food for lamprays. The slaves who 
displeased their masters were ordinarily sent to an underground prison. 
During the day, they had to work loaded with heavy iron chains. Many 
were branded with red hot iron. The mill where the slaves had to work 
is thus described by a Roman author; ‘Gods! what poor shrunken up 

men? With white skins striped with blows of the whip They were 

only the shreds of tunis; bent forward, head shaved, the feet held in a 
chain, the body deformed by the heat of the fire, the eyelids eaten away 
by the fumes, everything covered with grain dust ’. 1 


Seignbbos — History of Ancient Civilization. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


77 


PARALLEL CASES 


77 


English society also had at one time its servile classes. One has only 
to turn to the Domesday Book to see what the state of English Society 
was at the time of the Norman conquest. 

The Domesday Book which is a social survey of the land in England 
and its various kinds of tenants made by William the Conqueror 
immediately after his conquest in 1086 shows the following classes in 
which the population was divided: 


1. Gentry 
& 


Clergy 

2. Freeholders 


Yeomen 
3. Half-free 
or 

Unfree 


Tenants in Chief 


made up of 


Under tenants 
Freemen 


made up of 


Socmen 

Villeins 


1,400 

7,900 

12,000 

32.000 

169.000 


made up of 


Cottars and Borders 90,000 


9,300 


44,000 


259,000 


4. Slaves 


25,000 


Out of a total of 3,37,000 souls as many as 2,84,000 were either 
unfree or slaves. 

These are examples of servility in which race or religion played no part. 
But examples of servility by reason of race or religion are not wanting in 
history. The principal one is that of the Jews. On account of the belief 
that the Jews were responsible for the death of Christ, the Jews have 
been subjected to persecution. During the Middle ages in almost ah the 
European towns, the Jews were compelled to reside within a restricted 
quarter in a separate part of the town, and this Jewish quarter came 
to be known as the ‘Ghetto’. A Council held in Coyanza in Australia in 
1050 enacted ‘that no Christian shall reside in the same house with Jews, 
nor partake of the food; whoever transgresses this decree shall perform 
penances for seven days, or, refusing to do it, if a person of rank, he shall 
be excommunicated for a year; if of an inferior degree, he shall receive 100 
lashes.” The Council of Falencia in 1388 enacted that “Christians must not 
dwell within the quarters assigned to the Jews and Moors, and those that 
resided within them were to remove therefrom within two months after 
the publication of this decree in the Cathedral and if they did not, were 
to be compelled by Ecclesiastical censure.” In the Middle ages the Jews 
were obliged to have communal baths. No Jewish community could be 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


78 


78 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

destitute of such baths because the State often forbade the Jews 
to bathe in the rivers which the Christians used. In the fourteenth 
Century the Jews of Augers were readmitted to the town on several 
onerous conditions, one being that they would not bathe in the river 
Maine. The State also levied certain taxes upon the Jews. They were 
of three kinds — poll taxes, and particular fines and dues for individual 
transactions and privileges. The age at which Jews or Jewesses became 
liable to the poll tax varied considerably but the age was very young, 
and in Spain, as in England in 1273, every Jew above the age of ten 
was rateable. The billeting of soldiers on Jews in times of peace was a 
frequent species of exaction. So many were the vexatious dues exacted 
from the Jews everywhere throughout the Middle ages that it would be 
impossible to enumerate them all. To crown all this Pope Innocent III 
decided in 1215 that thenceforward the Jews must be marked off from 
the Christians by a badge prominently fastened to their outermost 
garment. Clear and emphatic in its demand that the Jews must wear 
badges, the Laternan council nevertheless avoided details. It left the 
definition of the size, colour, and character of the degrading mark to the 
taste of local Governors and States. Each Governor and State devised 
a badge of its own pattern. On account of the extraordinary number of 
modification, size and shape the badge sometimes became obsolete and 
the Jews managed to evade it. As the badge was often hidden, in 1525 
Pope Clement VII changed it for a yellow hat or bonnet. 

A consideration of the position of the Untouchables reminds one of 
the position of the Catholics in England. The Catholics were subjected 
to many disabilities. The catalogue of their disabilities is given below 1 : 

“1. That of Catholic marriages or of marriages Catholics celebrated by 
Catholic priests being deemed invalid by the existing laws, so that if 
one of the parties quit the other quicumque de causa (from any reason 
whatsoever), the deserted party receives no relief from the parish, nor 
redress from the law of his or her country. The priest, also it is said, 
may be transported, or put in prison and condemned to transportation 
for having married the parties. 

2. That of foundations or of moneys appropriated for the maintenance of 
priests, or to support the Catholic worship, being deemed by the existing 
laws to be appropriated to superstitious purposes and as such are liable 
to confiscation; and when alienated or seized upon by malevolent person 
cannot be recovered by law; Instances of such alienations and seizures 
might be adduced. 

3. That of Catholics serving in His Majesty’s Army and Navy being 
withheld from attending Divine Service according to the rite 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


79 


PARALLEL CASES 79 

of their own religion on Sundays and festivals, and of their being 
compelled to go to Protestant Churches on those days against their 
will — an evil which leads brave and loyal subjects to complain and 
be discontented at a time when every heart and hand should be 
united to oppose the enemy; and the United Kingdom should be as 
one man. 

4. By the 13th Charles II. commonly called the Corporation Act, their 
whole body is excluded from offices in cities and corporations. 

5. By the 25th Charles II, commonly called the Test Act, their whole 
body is excluded from civil and military offices. 

6. By the 7th and 8th William III, c. 27 Roman Catholics are liable to 
be prevented from voting at elections. 

7. By the 30th Charles II, s. 2. c. 1, Roman Catholic peers are prevented 
from filling their hereditary seats in Parliament. 

8. By the same statute Roman Catholics are prevented from sitting in 
the House of Commons. 

9. By several statutes Roman Catholics are disabled from presenting to 
advowsons, a legal incident of property which the law allows even 
to the Jew. 

10. Though a considerable proportion of His Majesty’s fleets and armies 
was Catholic, not only is no provision made for their religious comforts 
etc., but by the articles of war they are liable to the very heaviest 
pains and penalties for refusing to join in those acts of conformity 
to the religious rites of the Established Church. By the articles of 
war, section 1, a soldier absenting himself from Divine service and 
sermon is liable, for the first offence, to forfeit one Shilling, and for 
the second and every other offence, to forfeit one Shilling and to be 
put in irons. By the same articles section 2, article 5, ‘if he shall 
disobey any lawful command of his superior (and of course if he shall 
disobey any lawful command of his superior to attend Divine Service 
and Sermon) he shall suffer death or such punishment as by general 
court martial shall be awarded. 

11. In common with the rest of his Majesty’s subjects the Roman Catholics 
contribute to the support of the Established Religion; they have 
also to support their own religious functionaries; and thus have a 
double religious establishment to defray. Of course, however, they do 
not complain; but they think it a serious grievance that their own 
religious endowments are not legalized like those of the Protestant 
Dissenters. 

12. In hospitals, workhouses, and other public institutions the 
attendance of the ministers of their own communion is sometime 
denied to the poor of the Roman Catholic religion, and the children 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


80 


80 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of the Roman Catholic poor are sometimes forced into Protestant schools 
under the eyes of their parents.” 

Like Catholics, the Untouchables also suffer from certain disabilities. 

II 

[The following essay has been received from Shri S. S. Rege. As it 
deals with ‘Negroes & Slavery’ (One of the subjects of the scheme of this 
Chapter) which has not been dealt with in the above discussion, it has 
been included here — Ed.] 

Providence it seems has inexorably doomed the continent of Africa 
to be only a nursery of slaves for the free and civilized peoples of Asia 
and Europe. The Negro was imported as a slave by the Arabs into Asia 
long before he was introduced as a slave by the Europeans into America. 
Although this is so, Negro slavery in America and in the English Colonies 
has had a sorrowful history which has made people forget the importation 
of the Negro as a slave in Asia — and quite naturally — because Negro 
slavery in America as carried on by the Europeans was a most revolting 
thing. It began in the first decade of the 16th Century and lasted till 
the middle of the 19th Century. 

In the half century after Columbus first landed in the Bahama 
Island in 1492, the Spaniards conquered and partly occupied a huge 
area stretching from Mexico through Peru to Uruguay and including ah 
the larger west Indian Islands, while in 1531 the Portuguese began the 
colonization of Brazil. At once the new comers, the Portuguese and the 
Spaniards, set themselves to exploit the great natural wealth of their 
acquisitions, to work the gold and silver mines on the main land and 
to lay out plantations of tobacco indego and sugar in the rich soil of the 
island. But they were soon confronted by the difficulty of procuring the 
requisite supply of labour. A great deal of it was needed, and the cost 
of white men’s wages and the heat of the tropical sun made it virtually 
impossible for the Europeans to provide it for themselves. The only labour 
supply of a non-European character available on the spot consisted of 
the native Indians. The Portuguese and the Spaniards had massacred 
many Indians during the conquest. Many had fled to the mountains 
and forest from the scourge of the invadors. Those that were available 
were made slaves and made to work in the mines. Under the lash of the 
Portuguese and the Spaniards and the relentless labour that was exacted 
from them in the mines and in the fields the Indians sickened and died. 

The conquistadors — as the Spanish pioneers in South America 
were called — under the leadership of Nicholas de Ovando who followed 
promptly the trail of Columbus, brought with them a young priest 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


81 


PARALLEL CASES 81 

Batrolome’ de Las Casas who was well known for his piety. Las Casas 
was charged by the Court of Spain to deal lovingly with the Indians in 
the hope of bringing them to a knowledge of the sacred Christian faith. 
Las Casas was the first Bishop of Mexico. In performing the duty with 
which he was charged Las Casas while in Haiti witnessed the cruelties 
that were practised by the conquistadors upon the Indians and engaged 
himself passionately to the end of his life in preserving the pitiable 
remnants of the Caribbeans as the Indians of Haiti were called, from the 
inevitable destruction at the hands of their masters. The Caribbeans were 
a gentle, unoffending and hospitable race. They numbered no less than 
1,000,000 persons when Columbus found them, formed into kingdoms 
and ruled peacefully by their caciques. Under the systematic cruelty of 
these Spanish adventurers who came after Columbus their numbers were 
reduced to a bare 60,000. It is recorded that entire villages committed 
suicide inviting others to join them as the only way of escaping this 
scourge and this tyranny. Las Casas was a spectator to many of these 
scenes of self immolations. He protested in righteous anger. But his 
protests went in vain and were bound to go in vain. The clearing of the 
forest, the tilling of the soil and the working of the mines had to go on. 
Without this the kingdom given by God could not become the Paradise 
of man. Las Casas realized this. But he was also overwhelmed with 
grief at the thought of what the Indians would have to go through if 
this plan was to be realized. His benevolent instincts led him to petition 
the King of Spain to allow the free importation of Negroes. The Spanish 
Government in 1511 decreed that a large number of Negroes should be 
transported to the New World. In pursuance of this there came ships 
laden with African Negroes as cargo to make the New World a Paradise 
for man. For a few years both worked under the Conquistadors, Indians 
as well as Negroes. The sturdiness of the Negroes as compared with 
the Indians was soon proved. One of the Conquistadors has testified 
that when he prepared his timbers for the four brigautines that pass 
through the Isthmus from the Atlantic to the waters which flowed into 
the Pacific, he had used several hundred Indians and thirty Negroes, 
and, in the execution of this task, he found that 500 Indians perished 
and the thirty Negroes survived. The Negroes not only survived but 
prospered so much that it came to be a common opinion “that unless a 
Negro should happen to be hanged he would never die; for as yet, none 
had been known to perish from infirmity”. The Negro by his own conduct 
and character gave evidence that he was a more efficient tool than the 
Indian. The result was that the Indian was let go and the Negro was 
preferred for the labour, the former because God made him less sturdy 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


82 


82 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and the latter because God made him more sturdy. The result was that 
the Indian escaped slavery and the Negro took over the destiny which 
was intended by the Conquistadors to apply to him — a destiny to which 
he was invited by the pious and benevolent priest Las Casas and for 
which the Negro showed his own credentials of fitness. 

Having found that “one Negro does more work than four Indians” 
there was opened at once a regular market for trading in Negroes. 
The market which was opened by the Portuguese on the West Coast of 
Africa began immediately to show its profits and quite naturally because 
the exploitation of the untold wealth of the New World was impossible 
without Negro labour. People became so engrossed in this new business 
in human beings that the search for a new route to the East, which 
began it all, was abandoned. 

There was a keen competition between the various nations of Europe 
for a share in this new line in commerce. A papal Bull of demarcation 
had created for Spain and Portugal a monopoly on the wealth flowing 
in from the New World. The English and the Dutch feared there was 
danger to all Europe in this monopoly of American resources and were 
determined not to allow it. 

The English took a good hand in securing this trade for the benefit 
of their nation. The first deal took place in 1553 when 24 Negroes 
were brought from the Coast of Africa and quietly sold in the English 
market. The most intrepid, and who later became the most heartless 
of man stealers known to history was John Hawkins. Under Elizabeth 
he sailed forth in the good ship Jesus to get Negroes from Africa whom 
he sold into the Spanish Colonies. Bent on breaking the monopoly of 
Spain Sir Francis Drake followed Hawkins. International disputes over 
the pirating of these adventures arose which culminated in the clash 
and destruction of the Spanish Armada. It is interesting to bear in mind 
that in these disputes each nation shamelessly asserted that these acts 
of piracy committed by their subjects in stealing Negro slaves were “no 
private but public actions” supported by the respective states. 

As though the irony involved in using the Ship Jesus for carrying the 
Negroes for enslavement was not enough there occurred another event 
which also was full of irony. It was the simultaneous landing of the 
Pilgrim Fathers on Plymouth Rock in the Mayflower, and the landing 
of twenty Negroes at Jamestown in Virginia from a barnacled and sea 
worn brig which sailed up the James river and brought them for the 
use of the gentlemen adventurers of the first successful English Colony 
of Virginia in America. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


83 


PARALLEL CASES 83 

Thus were introduced into America the Negroes and the Pilgrim 
Fathers who stepped into it almost at the same time, the Pilgrim Fathers 
for preserving their liberty and the Negro for losing his freedom. For 
a long time the Negro formed a dominant element in the population 
of the American Colonies so far as numbers were considered. In a real 
sense America including its islands was settled chiefly from Africa and 
by Negroes. Before 1800 the number of Negroes brought in America 
was more than twenty times that of all Europeans combined. This 
was inevitable. The population of Europe was small, reduced further 
by its long wars and just emerging itself from a backward culture. 
For a long time the status of the imported Negro was undefined. The 
twenty Negroes brought by the Dutch and who landed in Jamestown 
were not immediately stamped in the Colony as slaves. They were 
accepted on much the same basis as the indentured servants. It has 
been found that in the muster rolls of the Colony of Virginia in 1624 
and 1625 there were recorded 23 Negroes all of whom were listed as 
‘servants’ as were the whites of the same class. It is also recorded 
that thirty-four years after the arrival of the twenty Negroes one of 
them Anthony Johnson got a judgment from the Court sustaining his 
claim to perpetual service of John Caster, another Negro. The status 
of slavery was not crystalized for fifty years and steps by which it 
became crystalized were very gradual. 

To begin with there was the law of servitude which applied to 
all servants whether they were Negroes or whites. In course of time 
a distinction came to be made in the treatment of the Negroes and 
white servants due to the fear of an alien and pagan people which as 
they became traditional and gained the sanction of custom, gradually 
modified the status of the African and transformed Negro servitude into 
Negro slavery. The slavery of the Negro in the American Colonies grew 
by the gradual addition of incidents modifying the law and custom of 
servitude. In this transition from servitude to slavery there are two 
principal steps. The first step in the transition was taken when the 
custom of holding Negroes “servants for life” was recognized. As has 
been observed, the distinguishing mark of the state of slavery is not 
the loss of liberty, political and civil but the perpetuity and absolute 
character of that loss, whether voluntary or involuntary in origin. It 
differs then from other forms of servitude limited in place or time, 
such as medieval vassalage, villeinage, modern serfdom, and technical 
servitude, in degree rather than in kind. The efforts of the planters to 
lengthen the terms of the service of their servants which failed with 
the white servants succeeded with the black. Public opinion supported 
the change because the blacks were regarded as dangerous if left 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


84 


84 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

uncontrolled. The second step by which Negro servitude was converted 
into Negro slavery was taken when the condition and status of the mother 
was extended to and continued in her offspring. The transmission from 
mother to child of the conditions of slavery for life grew naturally out of 
the fact that the master necessarily controlled the child, controlling the 
mother. It was evident that parents, under an obligation of life service, 
could make no valid provision for the support of their offspring and 
that a just title to the service of the child might rest on the master’s 
maintenance. This change which had undoubtedly been effected in custom 
long before it was formally sanctioned by law was recognized by statute 
in the different states of America between 1662 and 1741. 

This is how the Negro who was originally only a servant became 
a slave. It is to be noted that slavery in Africa the home of the Negro 
is a native institution and is very ancient. The most common ways of 
becoming a slave were: (1) By being born a slave, (2) by being sold into 
slavery for debt, (3) by becoming a slave through capture in war and 
(4) by kidnapping individuals and selling them into slavery due to revenge 
or greed and gain. The Negro was really familiar with the slave system 
and tasted the pleasures of a slave owner. One therefore may not feel 
the same sympathy with the Negro when he was made to give up the 
status of a master and made to occupy the position of a slave. But looked 
at even as a case of retribution well deserved, his condition as a slave 
in the New World to which he was transplanted, cannot fail to excite a 
righteous indignation for the miseries to which he was subjected by his 
new and alien masters. 

How great were the miseries of the Negro in the New World when 
he became subject to the system of slavery, it is not possible for the 
inhabitants of Europe or Asia to imagine. They may be described 
under three heads. The miseries of his capture, the miseries of travel 
and the miseries of his toil. First as to the ways of capturing Negroes 
for enslavement. In the early days Negroes could be rounded up by 
sudden landings on the coast; but in time the Negroes learned to watch 
for the coming of the ships and take refuge in the bush; and, though 
adventurous traders sometimes penetrated inland themselves, their 
usual custom was to do business with professional native or half-caste 
dealers who took the cheap goods they had bought from Europe — 
cloth, beads, hardware, muskets and powder, spirit — and bartered 
them for slaves with chiefs up-country. There is nothing to show that 
the chiefs, of the stronger tribes at any rate, resisted or wanted to 
resist the fascination of these wares, especially the guns and drink. 
Enslavement within a tribe, it was observed, became the penalty for 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


85 


PARALLEL CASES 85 

less and less serious offences; and inter-tribal warfare with slaves 
for its motive as well as the kindnapping of women and children 
in peacetime became a more or less constant feature of African life, 
spreading steadily into the interior of the continent with the steady 
infilteration of the trade. 

Secondly as to the mode of transporting the Negro to America. 
Having bought his slaves, the dealer marshalled them, men, women 
and children, in a caravan for the march, sometimes a very long march 
to the coast. Usually fetters were put on them to prevent escape and 
often they were locked in the “slave stick” — a long pole with a crutch 
at the end for fastening round the neck. They carried on their heads 
the loads of foodstuffs and other baggage required for the journey or 
the ivory or other native produce which the dealer might have bought. 
The rigours of the march were often too much for the weaker members 
of the party. Slaves who fell sick were killed or left to die. The more 
frequented slavetracks were strewn with human bones. Arrived at the 
coast, they were stowed on board the slave ships, which were specially 
fitted for their transport. The hold was divided horizontally by decks 
about three feet apart with a gangway down the middle. On these 
shelves the slaves were laid, handcuffed in pairs, men and women 
in separate holds. Since the bigger the cargo, the bigger the profit, 
they were some times packed so tightly that they could scarcely turn 
round. In a ship of 150 tons as many as 600 slaves were carried. The 
direct voyage to Brazil was fairly short, but the so-called “Middle 
Passage” to the West Indies — the main centre of distribution — might 
be protracted for several weeks by adverse or dropping winds. If it was 
calm enough, the slaves were brought up on deck and urged or forced 
to dance for exercise. In rough weather conditions of the slaves in the 
hold may be imagined. Disease of course, was rife on board. Though 
instruments were provided for forcibly feeding those who refused to eat, 
it was reckoned in the latter eighteenth century that on the average 
at least one-sixth of a cargo died on the voyage. As the end of the 
voyage approached, the slaves were examined and prepared for sale. 
Wounds, caused by storm or ill usage, were doctored up and as far 
as possible concealed. But the agents at the ports often complained 
that the “parcels of Negroes” landed were “bad” or “mean” or “much 
abused”. Finally, on ship board or in the public slave market, the 
slaves were put up for sale by “scramble” or auction. The price of a 
healthy man rose as high as £ 60 during the eighteenth century. The 
sick and injured were lumped with feeble women and children and sold 
off cheap as “refuse”. Even when at last they reached the plantations, 
the slaves had to face one more ideal before they settled down to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


86 


86 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

endure what was left to them of life. The first months of employment 
were known as the period of “seasoning” and during it no less on an 
average of one third of the novices failed to adjust themselves in body 
or spirit to the new conditions of climate or food or labour and died. 
Taking all the deaths together — in the slave-catching wars or raids, on 
the march to the sea, during the “Middle Passage” and in “seasoning” — it 
has been moderately reckoned that for every African Negro who became 
“seasoned” at least one other Negro was killed. 

Thirdly as to the actual conditions of life which a “seasoned “Negro 
slave had to undergo. The Negro slavery gave the Master two rights 
which were indisputably established, the right to own and the right 
to punish. The right to own was given a wide meaning. By virtue of 
it the Master had not merely a right to the services of the Negro as 
a servant, but he had also the right to sell those services, to transmit 
by inheritance and to alienate them in any way he liked. The effect of 
this conception of the right was “to completely confound and identify 
the person of the slave with the thing owned.” The conception of the 
slave as property made the Negro liable to be seized in payment of 
his master’s debts. Even after such slaves had been emancipated they 
were still liable to seizure for the payment of debts contracted prior to 
their emancipation. The conception of a slave as property rather than 
as person added further disability to the legal or civil status. He could 
neither own nor enjoy property in his own right. This was unlike the 
Roman Law which did allow the slaves to own property which was 
called peculium. It was a limited right but it was still an important 
right because it shows that the Roman Law did recognize that a slave 
though property was also a person. Not being a person a Negro as a 
slave could neither engage in trade nor marry. The right of the Master 
to punish a slave was also given a very cruel interpretation in its 
application to the Negro. In a case which arose in the state of North 
Carolina Court in 1829 the Cheif Justice in acquitting the Master who 
was indicted for beating his slave observed: 

“It was a mistake to say that the relations of Master and slave 
were like those of parent and child. The object of the parent in 
training his son was to render him fit to live the life of a free man, 
and, as a means to that end, he gave him moral and intellectual 
instruction. With the case of the slave it was very different. There 
could be no sense in addressing moral considerations to a slave. The 
end of slavery is the profit of the Master, his security and public 
safety; the subject, one doomed in his own person and his posterity 
to live without knowledge and without capacity to make anything 
his own, and to toil that neither may reap the fruits. What moral 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


87 


PARALLEL CASES 87 

consideration shall be addressed to such a being to convince him, 
that it is impossible, but that the most stupid must feel and know 
can never be true — that he is thus to labour on a principle of 
natural duty, or for the sake of his own personal happiness? Such 
services can only be expected from one who has no will of his own, 
who surrenders his will in implicit obedience to that of another. 
Such obedience is the consequence only of uncontrolled authority 
over the body. There is nothing else which can operate to produce 
the effect. The power of the Master must be absolute to render the 
submission of the slave perfect.” 

The result of such an interpretation of the Master’s right to punish 
was that for a long time in the U.S.A. if a Negro slave chanced to 
die as a consequence of “ a lawful correction” it was regarded by 
law as a lamentable and accidental homicide. How mercilessly this 
right to punish was exercised by the masters will be realized by a 
perusal of the extracts from letters written by a resident in Antigna 
in 1787. Says the writer — 

“The Negroes are turned out at sunrise, and employed in 
gangs from twenty to sixty or upwards, under the inspection of 
white overseers, generally poor scotch lads, who by their assiduity 
and industry frequently become masters of the plantations, to 
which they make out as indentured servants. Subordinate to these 
overseers are drivers, who are mostly black or mulatto fellows of 
the worst dispositions; these men are furnished with whips, while 
on duty, which they are obliged on pain of severe punishment to 
have with them, and are authorized to flog wherever they see the 
least relaxation from labour; nor is it a consideration with them, 
whether it proceeds from idleness, or inability, paying at the same 
time, little or no regard to age or sex. At twelve they are turned 
in (that is leave off work) to get what they can to refresh nature 
with; at half past one the bell rings, when they turn out and resume 
their labour until sunset 

* * * 

“The punishments inflicted on slaves in this island, are various 

and tormenting Among which is the thumbacrew, a barbarious 

invention to fasten the thumbs together, which appears to cause 
excuciating pain. The “iron necklace” is a ring, locked and rivetted 

about the neck; to these, collars are frequently added which 

prevent the wearers from laying down their heads with any 
degree of comfort. The “boots” are strong iron rings, full four 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


88 


88 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

inches in circumference; closed just above the ankles; to these some 
owners prefix chain, which the miserable sufferers, if able to work, 
must manage as well as they can, and it is not unfrequent to see 
in the streets of this town, at midday, Negroes chained together 
by these necklaces, as well as the boots. ... The ‘spurs’ are rings of 
iron, similar to the boots, to which are added spikes from three to 
four inches long, placed horizontally. A chain fastened about the 
body with a pedlock is another mode of tormenting this oppressed 
race of being.” 

It would be a great mistake of judging a whole class of slave owners 
by the vice of individuals. Often enough, the attitude of slaves to their 
Masters was quite friendly and equally often the attitude of the Masters 
to their slaves was kindly. None the less the system was a system 
founded on a purely economic basis making it inevitable that human 
being be created as mere tools to be used without being influenced by 
any considerations of humanity. 

It is unnecessary to adduce any more cases to illustrate the fact that 
the lowly, unfree and unprivileged classes have existed in the past in 
countries other than India. What is of importance is that these unfree, 
unprivileged classes have disappeared as a separate class and have 
become part and parcel of the great Society. The question is: Why has 
untouchability not disappeared ? 

There are various reasons. They are discussed in the following 
Chapters. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


89 


Chapter 9 

HINDUS AND WANT OF PUBLIC 
CONSCIENCE 


The cases in which the Hindus have indulged in violence against 
the Untouchables are cases of fight for equal freedom to all. If the 
Untouchables want to go in procession, they have no objection to the 
Hindus doing the same. If the Untouchables want to wear gold and silver 
ornaments, they do not object to the Hindus having the same right. If 
the Untouchables want to send their children to schools, they are not 
against the children of the Hindus having full freedom for education. 
If the Untouchables wish to draw water from the well, they have no 
objection to the Hindus exercising their right to take water. One can 
go on ad infinitum. But it is unnecessary. The point is easy and simple 
to grasp. It is that whatever freedom the Untouchables claim is not 
exclusive to them and is not inconsistent with the right of the Hindus to 
equal freedom. Why then does the Hindus use violence to put down such 
innocent and perfectly lawful acts? Why does he regard his lawlessness 
as lawful? Who cannot see that the acts and omissions, of the Hindus 
in his dealings with the Untouchables cannot be called by any other 
name except that of social wrongs. The acts and omissions are not mere 
inequities; they are not mere indignities. They are gross instances of 
man’s inhumanity to man. For a doctor not to treat a patient because 
the patient is an Untouchable, for a body of Hindu villages to burn the 
houses of the Untouchables, to throw human excreta in their well if 
these are not acts of inhumanity, I wonder what can be? The question 
is why has the Hindu no conscience? 

There is only one answer to these questions. The class composition 
in other countries were based on economic and social considerations. 
Slavery and serfdom had no foundation in religion. Untouchability 
though it can give and does economic advantages to the Hindus, is 
primarily based on religion. There is nothing sacrosanct in economic 
and social interests. They yield to time and circumstances. This is 
the broad explanation why slavery and serfdom have vanished and 
why untouchability has not. The same is the answer to the two other 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


90 


90 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

questions. If the Hindu observes untouchability it is because his religion 
enjoins him to do so. If he is ruthless and lawless in putting down the 
Untouchables rising against his Established Order, it is because his 
religion not only tells him that the Established Order is divine and 
therefore sacrosanct but also imposes upon him a duty to see that this 
Established Order is maintained by all means possible. If he does not 
listen to the call of humanity, it is because his religion does not enjoin 
him to regard the Untouchables as human beings. If he does not feel 
any qualms of conscience in assaulting, looting, burning and other acts 
of atrocities against the Untouchables, it is because his religion tells him 
that nothing is sin which is done in defence of the social order. 

Many Hindus would regard this as a travesty of their religion. The 
best way to meet the charge is to quote Chapter and verse from Manu 
who is the architect of Hindu Society. Let anyone, who denies what I have 
said, read the following Commands of Manu regarding untouchability. 
Untouchables and the duties of the Hindus in regard to them : 

“1. All those tribes in this world, which are excluded from (the community 
of) those born from the mouth, the arms, the thighs, and the feet (of 
Brahman), are called Dasyus, whether they speak the language of the 
Mlenchhas (barbarians) or that of the Aryans. 

2. Near well known trees and burial ground, on mountains and in groves, 
let these (tribes) dwell, known (by certain marks), and subsisting by 
their peculiar occupations. 

3. But the dwellings of the Chandalas and Shwapakas shall be outside 
the village, they must be made Apatras and their wealth (shall be) 
dogs and donkeys. 

4. Their dress (shall be) the garments of the dead, (they shall eat) their 
food from broken dishes, black iron (shall be) their ornaments, they 
must always wander from place to place. 

5. A man who fulfils a religious duty, shall not seek intercourse with them ; 
their transactions (shall be) among themselves, and their marriages 
with their equals. 

6. Their food shall be given to them by others (than an Aryan giver) in 
a broken dish; at night they shall not walk about in villages and in 
towns. 

7. By day they must go about for the purpose of their work, distinguished 
by marks at the king’s command, and they shall carry out the corpses 
(of persons) who have no relatives, that is a settled rule. 

(1) Manu X. 45: (2) Ibid. X. 50: (3) Ibid. X. 51: (4) Ibid.. X. 52: (5) Ibid. X. 53: 
(6) Manu X. 54: (7) Ibid. X. 65. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


91 


HINDUS AND WANT OF PUBLIC CONSCIENCE 91 

8. By the king’s order, they shall always execute the criminals in accordance 
with the law, and they shall take for themselves the clothes, the beds 
and the ornaments of (such) criminals. 

9. He who has had connection with a woman of one of the lowest castes 
shall be put to death. 

10. If one who (being a member of the Chandalas, or some other low caste) 
must not be touched, intentionally defiles by his touch one who (as 
a member of a twice born caste) may be touched (by the other twice 
born persons only) he shall be put to death.” 

Can anybody, who reads these Commandments of Manu deny 
that it is Hindu religion which is responsible for the perpetuation of 
untouchability and for the lawlessness and want of conscience on the part 
of the Hindus towards the Untouchables? Indeed, if the acts of omission 
and commission which have been detailed in the earlier Chapters of 
this book were correlated to these ten Commandments, it will be found 
that the Hindus in committing these acts are merely following the 
Commandments of Manu. If the Hindu will not touch an Untouchable 
and regards it as an offence if an Untouchable touches him, it is because 
of the Commandments Nos. 5 and 10. If the Hindus insist upon the 
segregation of the Untouchables, it is because of Commandment No. 3. 
If the Hindu will not allow the Untouchable to wear clean clothes, gold 
ornaments, he is only following Commandment No. 8. If the Hindu will 
not tolerate an Untouchable acquiring property and wealth, he is only 
following Commandment No. 3. 

It is really unnecessary to labour the matter further. It is 
incontrovertible that the main cause which is responsible for the fate of 
the Untouchables is the Hindu religion and its teachings. A comparison 
between Paganism and Christianity in relation to slavery and Hinduism 
in relation to untouchability reveals how different has been the influence 
of the two religions on human institutions, how elevating has been the 
influence of the former and how degrading that of the latter. Those who 
are fond of comparing slavery with Untouchability do not realize that 
they are facing a paradox. Legally the slave was not a freeman. Yet, 
socially he had all the freedom necessary for the growth of his personality. 
Legally the Untouchable is a freeman. Yet, socially he has no freedom 
for the growth of his personality. 

This is indeed a very glaring paradox. What is the explanation of 
this paradox? There is only one explanation of this paradox. It is that 
while religion was on the side of the slave, religion has been against 

(8) Manu X. 56: (9) Vishnu V. 43: (10) Vishnu V. 104. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


92 


92 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the Untouchables. The Roman Law declared that the slave was not a 
person. But the religion of Rome refused to accept that principle, at 
any rate, refused to extend that principle to social field. It treated him 
as a human being fit for comradeship. The Hindu Law declared that 
the Untouchable was not a person. Contrary to Paganism, the Hindu 
religion not only accepted the principle but extended it to the social 
field. As the Hindu Law did not regard the Untouchable a person, 
Hinduism refused to regard him as a human being fit for comradeship. 

That the Roman religion saved the slave from the social degradation 
consequent upon his legal degradation is beyond question. It saved him 
from such degradation in three different ways. One way by which the 
Roman religion saved the slave was to keep the most sacred place open 
for the slave to occupy. As has been observed: 

“ Roman religion was never hostile to the slave. It did not 

close the temple doors against him; it did not banish him from its 
festivals. If slaves were excluded from certain ceremonies the same 
may be said of freemen and women — men being excluded from the 
rites of Bona Dea, Vesta and Ceras, women from those of Hercules 
at the Ara Maxima. In the days when the old Roman divinities 
counted for something, the slave came to be informally included 
in the family, and could consider himself under the protection of 

the Gods of the household Augustus ordered that freed women 

should be eligible as priestesses of Vesta. The law insisted that a 
slave’s grave should be regarded as sacred and for his soul Roman 
Mythology provided no special heaven and no particular hell. Even 
Juvenal agrees that the slave’s soul and body, is made of the same 
stuff as his master.” 

The second way in which the Roman religion helped the slave was 
equivalent to lodging a complaint before the City Prefect whose duty it 
became to hear cases of wrong done to slaves by their masters. This was 
a secular remedy. But the Roman religion had provided another and a 
better remedy. According to it, the slave was entitled to throw himself 
before the altar and demand that he should be sold to a kinder master. 

The third way in which the Roman religion saved the slave 
by preventing the Roman Law from destroying the sanctity of his 
personality as a human being. It did not make him unfit for human 
association and comradeship. For the Roman slave this was the 
greatest saving grace. Suppose Roman society had an objection to 
buy vegetables, milk, butter or take water or wine from the hands of 
the slave; suppose Roman society had an objection to allow slaves to 
touch them, to enter their houses, travel with them in cars, etc., would 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


93 


HINDUS AND WANT OF PUBLIC CONSCIENCE 93 

it have been possible for the master to train his slave to raise him from 
semi-barbarism to a cultured state? Obviously not; it is because the slave 
was not held to be an Untouchable that the master could train him and 
raise him. We again come back therefore to the same conclusion, namely, 
that what has saved the slave is that his personality was recognised 
by society and what has ruined the Untouchable is that Hindu society 
did not recognize his personality, treated him as one whose personality 
was unclean which rendered him as unfit for human association and 
common dealing. 

There was no gulf, social or religious, which separated the slave from 
the rest of the society. In outward appearance he did not differ from the 
freeman; neither colour nor clothing revealed his condition; he witnessed 
the same games as the freeman; he shared in the life of the Municipal 
towns and got employed in the State service, engaged himself in trade 
and commerce as all freemen did. Often apparent equality in outward 
things counts far more to the individual than actual identity of rights 
before the law. Between the slave and the freed there seems often to 
have been little social barrier. Marriage between the slave and freed 
and even freed and slave was very common. The slave status carried no 
stigma on the man in the slave. He was Touchable and even respectable. 
All this was due to the attitude of the Roman religion towards the slave. 

There is no space to describe at length the attitude of Christianity 
to slavery. But it was different from Paganism. It is not known to many 
that during the period of slavery in America, Christian priests were not 
prepared to convert Negro slaves to Christianity because of their view 
that it would degrade Christianity if the convert remained a slave. In 
their opinion, one Christian could not hold another Christian as a slave. 
He was bound to offer him fellowship. 

To sum up, Law and Religion are two forces which govern the conduct 
of men. At times, they act as handmaids to each other. At other times, 
they act as check and counter-check. Of the two forces, Law is personal 
while religion is impersonal. Law being personal it is capable of being 
unjust and inequitous. But religion being impersonal, it can be impartial. 
If religion remains impartial, it is capable of defeating the inequity 
committed by law. This is exactly what happened in Rome in regard to 
the slave. That is why religion is believed to ennoble man and not to 
degrade him. Hinduism is an exception. It has made the Untouchable 
sub-human. It has made the Hindu inhuman. There is no escape to 
either from the established order of the sub-human and the inhuman. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


94 


Chapter 10 

HINDUS AND THEIR WANT OF 
SOCIAL CONSCIENCE 

i 

Everyone who feels moved by the deplorable condition of the 
Untouchables begins by saying: “We must do something for the 
Untouchables”. One seldom hears any of the persons interested in 
the problem saying: “Let us do something to change the Hindu.” It is 
invariably assumed that the object to the reclaimed is the Untouchables 
as though untouchability was due to his depravity and that he alone is 
responsible for his condition. If there is to be a Mission, it must be to 
the Untouchables. Nothing requires to be done to the Hindu. He is sound 
in mind, manners and morals. He is whole, there is nothing wrong with 
him. He is not the Sinner. 

What is the real state of affairs? This argument that there is nothing 
wrong with the Hindus and that the Untouchable is responsible for 
whatever wrong he suffers is very much the argument that is used by 
the Christians for defending themselves against the inhuman treatment 
accorded by them to the Jews. A very crushing reply has been given by 
Mr. Louis Goulding to the Christians on behalf of the suffering Jews. In 
discussing the source of the Jewish Problem Mr. Louis Goulding says: 

“I beg leave to give a very homely instance of the sense in which 
I consider the Jewish Problem in essence a Gentile Problem. A close 
acquaintance of mine is a certain Irish Terrier of mixed pedigree, 
the dog Paddy, who is to my friend John Smith as the apple of both 
his eyes. Paddy dislikes Scotch terriers; it is enough for one to pass 
within twenty yards of Paddy to deafen the neighbourhood with 
challenges and insults. It is a practice which John Smith deplores, 
which, therefore, he does his best to check — all the more as the 
object of Paddy’s detestation are often inoffensive creatures, who 
seldom speak first. Despite all his affection for Paddy, he considers, 
as 1 do, that Paddy’s unmannerly behaviour is due to some measure 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


95 


HINDUS AND THEIR WANT OF SOCIAL CONSCIENCE 95 

of original sin in Paddy. It has not yet been suggested to us that 
what is here involved is a Scotch Terrier Problem and that when 
Paddy attacks a neighbour who is peacefully engaged in inspecting 
the evening smells it is the neighbour who should be arraigned for 
inciting to attack by the fact of his existence.” 

If we equate Paddy to the Hindu and Scotch Terrior to the 
Untouchable the argument of Goulding will apply to the Hindus no less 
than it does to the Christians. If for the reasons given by Mr. Goulding 
the Jewish Problem is in reality a Christian Problem then the Problem 
of the Untouchables is primarily a Hindu Problem. 

Are the Hindus conscious, do they recognise that the Untouchables 
are a problem to them? Are they worried about it? Is it weighing on 
their minds? Certain obvious tests may be applied in order to ascertain 
the truth. One test is the volume of literature on the subject. One 
can take the volume of literature issued on the Negroes of America 
as a standard measure. One is amazed at the huge amount of printed 
material that exists in the United States on the subject of the Negroes. 
It is said that a really complete bibliography on the Negro Problem 
would run up to several hundred thousand titles. The literature is 
really immeasurable. This proves as nothing else can, how much it is 
a problem to the Whites. It has disturbed through several generations 
all classes of people in America, the religious moralists, the political 
philosophers, the Statesmen, the philanthropists, the social scientists, 
the politicians, the businessmen and the plain ordinary citizen as well. 

What is the amount of literature on the Untouchables that exists 
in India? Not more than half a dozen pamphlets! 

Another test would be the test of social behaviour. I give below two 
cases reported in the papers. One is from the ‘Pratap’ of 5th March 
1926. It gives the following news: 

“On the 23rd of February at about 11 o’clock in the day, a 
group of about 12 or 13 were digging earth in Begumganj, Lucknow 
when the quarry collapsed and they were all buried under heaps 
of earth. One boy and six women were rescued after the earth had 
been removed out of whom only one woman turned out to be alive, 
who belonged to Mirpur. She had received grievous injuries and her 
condition was very critical. The Hindu inhabitants of Begumganj 
however refused to give a bed to lay that woman on. At last a 
Muslim offered a bed; now there was no Hindu prepared to help 
to carry the poor woman as far as her house. At last, a sweeper 
was called and he undertook to carry the woman to her home as 
she lay on the bed.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


96 


96 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The best illustration of the absence of conscience in the Hindu 
towards the Untouchables is to be found in the following incident which 
is reported by the Correspondent of the ‘Sangram and published in its 
issue of 10th July 1946. The correspondent says: 

“A woman died on the 8th of July 1946 in the Anath Ashram 
(Beggars Home) called Azil situated in a village called Mhapse 
(in Goa) and maintained by Christians. The woman was believed 
to be a Hindu. She was alone and had no relations. Seeing that 
there was no one to dispose of the dead body and to perform 
funeral rites, the Hindus of the village came together and raised 
a subscription for the purpose. They brought the dead body out 
of the Beggars’ Home. Just about that time some Untouchables, 
who knew the woman came there and recognized the dead body. 

The moment the Hindus came to know that the woman belonged 
to the Untouchables the Hindus who had gathered there deserted 
the dead body and started walking away. The Untouchables who 
had come requested the Hindus to give them the amount they had 
collected for buying the coffin and the shroud. The Hindus refused 
to part with the money saying that the money was collected from 
the subscribers on the representation that the deceased woman was 
a Hindu woman. As she is not a Hindu but an Untouchable, they 
can’t spend the money on her funeral. The Untouchables had to 
do their best to dispose of their dead body. The Untouchables had 
good evidence of the love and affection the Hindus bear towards 
them. The following is from the ‘Milap’ of 2nd October 1925. Its 
correspondent reports: 

“News has been received from Ruddurprayag that one evening 
in the first week of September a Harijan came to the Dharmashala 
(or monastery) of Ruddurprayag. When he learnt that a tiger came 
there every night, he requested the pastor of the Dharmashala to 
let him lie hidden in some corner of the Dharmashala for the night, 
so that he may remain safe from the tiger. The callous pastor, 
however, paid no heed to the request and closed the gates of the 
Dharmashala. The ill-starred Harijan laid himself down outside 
in one corner, full of apprehensions of the tiger. Towards the end 
of the night the tiger came and attacked the Harijan. As the man 
was quite strong and healthy and despair made him fearless, 
he caught hold of the tiger’s neck and shouted ‘I have grabbed 
the tiger. Come and kill him’. But the high caste pastor did not 
open the door, nor did he offer any sort of help, so that very soon 
the grip of the Harijan loosened and the tiger also ran away. At 
present the man is lying wounded in Shrinagar (Garhwal) where 
he is getting himself treated. His condition is said to be critical.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


97 


HINDUS AND THEIR WANT OF SOCIAL CONSCIENCE 97 

The heartlessness disclosed by these instances shows that the Hindu 
does not bother about what he does to the Untouchables or about what 
happens to the Untouchables. 

A third test would be the test of service and sacrifice for the uplift 
of the Untouchables. Here again, one may adopt the service and sacrifice 
of the Americans for raising the Negroes as our standard measure. Here 
are some figures. 


Consider the bequests 1 made by the Whites for the benefit of the 
Negro education. 


Testator 

Amount 
(in Dollars) 

Testator 

Amount 
(in Dollars) 

Kane 

50,000 

Mason 

1,00,000 

Harton 

5,000 

Naunbert 

40,000 

Troughton 

1,60,600 

Harrison 

2,30,000 

Ottinger 

500 

Munger 

75,000 

Gambrille 

35,000 

Corliss 

45,000 

Jarepki 

1,000 

Rosenbanin 

1,000 

Strock 

500 

Burton 

1,000 

Kidder 

5,000 

Conroy 

1,00,000 

Clodin 

10,000 

Kent 

10,000 

Wood 

500 

Duke 

1,40,000 

Harkness 

12,50,000 

Marciliat 

5,000 

Beatie 

2,90,000 

Masey 

25,000 

Marquant 

5,000 

Nicholas 

20,000 

Newton 

5,000 

Garretson 

15,00,000 

Hummington 

25,000 

Hatcher 

20,000 

Phelps-Stokes 

2,80,000 

Wright 

10,000 

Butler 

30,000 




These figures relate to the period before 1930. They do not take 
account of residuary bequests. 


Compare the Educational funds 2 that exist for the advancement of 
education among the Negroes. They are: 

(i) The Avery Fund. 

(: ii ) The Vilas Bequest. 

(Hi) The African Fund. 

( iv ) The Buckingham Fund. 

( v ) The George Washington Educational Fund. 


(1) This Table is prepared from the list given in the ‘Negro Year Book’ 1931-32, p. 202. 

(2) Ibid., pp. 213-18. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


98 


98 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(vi) The Miner Fund. 

( vi ) The Steward Missionary Foundation. 

(viii) The Daniel Hand Fund. 

( ix ) The John Slater Fund. 

(x) The Phelps-Stokes Fund. 

In addition to this, there are general Funds such as the Carnegie 
Corporation Julius Rosenwald Fund and the Rockfeller Foundation which 
also help the Negroes. The amounts distributed by these funds is not 
known. But they must be amounting to millions. 

Compare the amount spent by Religious organizations on the education 


of the Negroes. Here are some interesting 1 

figures. 



Annual 

Permanent 

Value of 


Expenditure 

fund for Negro 
Education 

school plants, 
etc. 


(In Dollars) 

(In Dollars) 

(In Dollars) 

American Baptist Home Mission 
Board 

116,247 

1,597,700 

3,594,251 

American Church Institute for 
Negroes (Episcopal) 

185,100 

450,000 

3,000,000 

American Missionary Association 

368,057 

3,228,421 

3,200,000 

Church of Christ (Disciples) 
United Christian Missionary 
Society 

91,072 


500,000 

Lutheran Evangelical Synodical 
Conference of North America 
Board Colored Mission 

74,900 


175,000 

Methodist Episcopal Church 
Board of Education. 
Institutions for Negroes 

259,264 

1,962,729 

5,000,000 

Methodist Episcopal Church 
Woman’s Home Missionary 
Society of 

104,975 


360,000 

Presbyterian Church in the 
U.S.A. Division of Missions 
for Colored People 

405,327 

1,994,032 

3,560,000 

United Presbyterian Church 
Board of of Mission for 
Freemen 

98,000 

645,000 

1,000,000 

It is estimated that the i 

total amount 

spent for the religious and 


philanthropic organizations between 1865 and 1930 comes to 135,000,000 
dollars on the advancement of the Negroes. Of this amount, 85,000,000 
dollars have been contributed by the Whites. 

What is the measure of service and sacrifice of the Hindus for the 
elevation of the Untouchables. The only organization the Hindus can 
1 This Table is prepared from the list given in the ‘Negro Year Book’ 1931-32. p. 213. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


99 


HINDUS AND THEIR WANT OF SOCIAL CONSCIENCE 99 

boast of is the Harijan Sevak Sangh 1 . Its capital fund does not probably 
go beyond 10 lakhs. Its annual expenditure does not go beyond a few 
thousand rupees on petty and insignificant and insubstantial purposes. 
The Fund is not a welfare fund. It is essentially a Political Fund intended 
to make the Untouchables vote with the Hindus. 

Why is this difference? Why do the Americans exert so much in service 
and sacrifice for the elevation of the Negroes and why have the Hindus 
cared to do nothing for the elevation of the Untouchables? The answer 
is that the Americans have a social conscience while the Hindus have 
none. It is not that the Hindus have no sense of right and wrong, good 
and bad, moral and immoral. What is wrong with the Hindu is that his 
sense of moral obligation towards others is restricted to a limited class 
of people, namely, the members of his caste. As Mr. H. J. Paton says 2 : 

“Clearly a man may be a good member of a limited society 
without being a morally good man. There seem indeed to be already 
shadows or anticipations of moral excellence even in the man who 
carries out coherently an individual policy of life; and we begin to 
find something which we may almost mistake for virtue itself, when 
we consider the man who is a loyal member of any society, even of a 
gang of thieves. Yet although there must be honour among thieves, 
a thief is not therefore an honourable man. The morally good man 
seems to be the man who is good as a member not of a limited 
society but of an unlimited society — of a society of societies whose 
purpose includes all purposes, and beyond which there is no other 
society to be a source of conflicting claims of duties.” 

The Untouchable does not belong to the society of the Hindus and 
the Hindu does not feel that he and the Untouchables belong to one 
society. This is the reason why the conduct of the Hindu is marked by 
a moralistic unconcernedness. 

Not having conscience, the Hindu has no such thing in him as 
righteous indignation against the inequities and injustices from which 
the Untouchable has been suffering. He sees no wrong in these inequities 
and injustices and refuses to budge. By his absence of conscience the 
Hindu is a great obstacle in the path of the removal of untouchability. 

• • 


1 For details see my Book “What Congress and Gandhi have done to the Untouchables.’ 

2 The “Good Will” by H. J. Paton. p. 281. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


100 


Chapter 11 

THE HINDU AND HIS BELIEF IN 
CASTE 


Among the Hindu social reformers there is a moderate section. 
This section holds that untouchability is separate from the caste 
system. Following this ideology they hold that it is possible to remove 
untouchability without attacking the caste system. The religious minded 
Hindu is as opposed to the removal of untouchability as he is to the 
removal of the caste system. He is as opposed to dealing with social 
reform in two stages as he is in dealing with it in one stage. But the 
politically-minded Hindu is tremendously fond of the idea. That is 
obviously for two reasons. In the first place, it gives the Hindu the 
chance of showing himself in international world as a better specimen 
of democracy than he really is. Secondly, by leaving caste alone there 
is no risk of the caste Hindus forsaking the Congress. 

Those who propose to deal with untouchability without damaging the 
caste system, rest their case on verse 4 of Chapter X of the Manu Smriti. 
In the verse, Manu says that there are only four varnas and that there 
is no fifth varna. This verse is interpreted to mean that the untouchables 
are included in the fourth varna, that they are part of the Shudras and as 
there is no objection to touching the Shudras there could be no objection 
to touching the Untouchables. However pleasing this construction may 
be to the politically minded Hindu, it does accord with the intention of 
what Manu wanted to convey. The verse is open to another construction. 
It may mean that Manu was not prepared to enlarge the Chaturvarnya 
and make it a Panchavarnya by recognising these communities which 
were outside the four varnas as constituting the fifth varna. In saying 
that there is no fifth varna what he means to suggest is that he did not 
want to incorporate those outside the four varnas into the Hindu society 
by making the Hindu society consist of five varnas instead of four. That 
he wanted to convey the latter intention is abundantly clear by speaking 
of a category of people as Bahyas 1 or Varna Bahyas which means those 
outside the varna system. If Manu wanted to include all persons within 
the four varnas there was no reason for speaking of some people as 
varna Bahyas. Indeed, he recognises two sub-divisions within the class 
of Varna Bahyas. He calls them Hinas 2 and Antayevasins 3 . Given these 


Manu X. 28. 2 Manu X. 31. 3 Manu X. 39. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


101 


THE HINDU AND HIS BELIEF IN CASTE 101 

facts, it is obvious that the construction sought to be placed in the verse 
in the Manu Smriti will not deceive the orthodox Hindu into accepting 
that the maintenance of untouchability is contrary to the Manu Smriti 
and that its abolition is not therefore contrary to the tenets of the Hindu 
religion. 

The argument based on the interpretation of Manu’s text is too 
intellectual for the ordinary uneducated Hindu. He knows only two 
things. One thing he knows is that there are three barriers in the matter 
of social intercourse which he must observe. They are (1) prohibition 
against inter-dining, (2) prohibition against inter-marriage, while in 
untouchability there is third barrier added and (3) prohibition against 
physically touching certain class of people. The first two barriers make 
up the caste. The third forms untouchability. The caste Hindu does not 
bother about the number of barriers. He is particular about the observance 
of the barrier. When he is asked not to observe, he turns round and 
asks why not? His argument is that, if I am free to observe the first 
two barriers, what is wrong if I observe the third? Psychologically, caste 
and untouchability are one integral system based on one and the same 
principle. If the caste Hindus observe untouchability it is because they 
believe in caste. 

Looked at from this point of view, the idea of hoping to remove 
untouchability without destroying the caste system is an utter futility. 
The underlying idea that caste and untouchability are two different 
things is founded on a fallacy. The two are one and are inseparable. 
Untouchability is only an extension of the caste system. There can be no 
severence between the two. The two stand together and will fall together. 

There is another reason why untouchability cannot disappear by a 
stratagem, legal or rational. As has already been pointed out, the Hindu 
social order is based on the principle of graded inequality. It may not be 
an exaggeration to say that not many people understand the significance 
of this principle. The social system based on inequality stands on a 
different footing from a social system based on graded inequality. The 
former is a weak system which is not capable of self-preservation. The 
latter on the other hand, is capable of self-preservation. In a social system 
based on inequality, the low orders can combine to overthrow the system. 
None of them have any interest to preserve it. In a social system based 
on graded inequality the possibility of a general common attack by the 
aggrieved parties is nonexistent. In a system of graded inequality, the 
aggrieved parties are not on a common level. This can happen only when 
they are only high and low. In the system of graded inequality there 
are the highest (the Brahmins). Below the highest are the higher (the 
Kshatriyas). Below the higher are those who are high (Vaishya). Below the 
high are the low (Shudra) and below the low are those who are lower (the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


102 


102 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Untouchables). All have a grievance against the highest and would like 
to bring about their down fall. But they will not combine. The higher 
is anxious to get rid of the highest but does not wish to combine with 
the high, the low and the lower lest they should reach his level and be 
his equal. The high wants to over-throw the higher who is above him 
but does not want to join hands with the low and the lower, lest they 
should rise to his status and become equal to him in rank. The low is 
anxious to pull down the highest, the higher and the high but he would 
not make a common cause with the lower for fear of the lower gaining a 
higher status and becoming his equal. In the system of graded inequality 
there is no such class as completely unprivileged class except the one 
which is at the base of the social pyramid. The privileges of the rest are 
graded. Even the low is a privileged class as compared with the lower. 
Each class being privileged, every class is interested in maintaining the 
social system. 

Untouchability may be a misfortune to the Untouchables. But there 
is no doubt that it is a good fortune to the Hindus. It gives them a class 
which they can look down upon. The Hindus do not want a system in 
which nobody will be anybody. They also do not want a system in which 
everybody may be somebody. They want a system in which they will be 
somebodies and others will be nobodies. The Untouchables are nobodies. 
This makes the Hindus some bodies. The system of untouchability sustains 
the natural pride of the Hindus and make them feel as well as look 
big. This is an additional reason why the Hindus are not likely to give 
up untouchability particularly those large majority who are small men. 

Untouchability will vanish only when the whole of the Hindu Social 
Order, particularly the caste system will be dissolved. Is this possible? 
Every institution is sustained by some sort of a sanction. There are 
three kinds of sanction which supply life-force to an institution. They are 
legal, social and religious. The vitality of the institution depends upon 
the nature of the sanction. What is the nature of the sanction behind 
the caste system? Unfortunatley, the sanction behind the caste system is 
the religious sanction, for, the caste as a new form of the Varna system 
derives its sanction from the Vedas which form the sacred book of the 
Hindu religion and which are infallible. I say unfortunately because 
anything which has a religious sanction becomes by virtue of it sacred 
and eternal. To the Hindu, caste is sacred and caste is eternal. If caste 
cannot vanish what hope is there for untouchability to disappear? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


103 


PART IV 

What the Untouchables have to 
face 

Chapter 12 

ANTAGONISM OF THE 
ADMINISTRATION 


Section 2 of the Indian Penal Code reads as follows: 

“ Every person shall be liable to punishment under this Code and 
not otherwise for every act or omission contrary to the provisions 
thereof, of which he shall be guilty within British India.” 

The Law Commissioners who prepared the draft Penal Code in their 
address to the Secretary of State thought it necessary to draw pointed 
attention to the words ‘Every Person’. In the course of their observation, 
they said: 

“Your Lordship in Council will see that we have not proposed to 
except from the operation of this Code any of the ancient sovereign 
houses of India residing within the Company’s territories. Whether 
any such exception ought to be made is a question which, without a 
more accurate knowledge that we possess of existing treaties, of the 
sense in which those treaties have been understood, of the history of 
negotiations, of the temper and of the power of particular families, 
and of the feeling of the body of the people towards those families, 
we could not venture to decide. We will only beg permission most 
respectfully to observe that every such exception is an evil; that is 
an evil that any man should be above the law; that it is still greater 
evil that the public should be taught to regard as a high and enviable 
distinction the privilege of being above the law; that the longer such 
privileges are suffered to last, the more difficult it is to take them 
away; that there can scarcely even be a fairer opportunity for taking 
them away than at the time when the Government promulgates a 
new Code binding alike on persons of different races and religions; 
and that we greatly doubt whether any consideration, except that 
of public faith solemnly pledged, deserves to be weighed against the 
advantages of equal justice.” 

It might have been thought that this principle of equal justice would 
strike a death blow to the Established Order. As a matter of fact, far 
from suffering any damage the Established Order has continued to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


104 


104 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

operate in spite of it. It might be asked why the principle of equal 
justice has failed to have its effect. The answer to this is simple. To 
enunciate the principle of justice is one thing. To make it effective is 
another thing. Whether the principle of equal justice is effective or 
not must necessarily depend upon the nature and character of the 
civil services who must be left to administer the principle. If the civil 
service is by reason of its class bias the friend of the Established 
Order and the enemy of the new Order, the new Order can never 
come into being. That a civil service in tune with the new order was 
essential for the success of the new order was recognized by Karl 
Marx in 1871 in the formation of the Paris Commune and adopted 
by Lenin in the constitution of Soviet Communism. Unfortunately, 
the British Government never cared about the personnel of the Civil 
Service. Indeed it opened the gates of the administration to those 
classes who believed in the old Established Order of the Hindus in 
which the principle of equality had no place. As a result of this fact, 
India has been ruled by the British but administered by the Hindus. 
A few statistics of the composition of the Civil Service will fully- 
demonstrate this fact. 

From the capital of India down to the village the whole 
administration is rigged by the Hindus. The Hindus are like the 
omnipotent almighty pervading all over the administration in all its 
branches having its authority in all its nooks and corners. There is 
no loophole for anyone opposed to the old order to escape. No matter 
what the Department, whether it is Revenue, Police or Justice it is 
manned by the Hindu. If the Established Order has continued to 
exist, it is because of the unfailing support it received from the Hindu 
officials of the State. The Hindu officials are not merely administering 
the affairs on their merit. They are administering them with an eye 
to the parties. Their principle is not equal justice to all. Their motto 
is justice consistent with the Established Order. This is inevitable. 
For they carry over into administration the attitude towards different 
classes in society under the Established Order. This is well illustrated 
by the attitude of the State officials towards the Untouchables in the 
field of administration. 

As every Untouchable will be able to testify, if an Untouchable 
goes to a police officer with a complaint against the caste Hindu, 
instead of receiving any protection he will receive plenty of abuses. 
Either he will be driven away without his complaint being recorded 
or if it is recorded, it would be recorded quite falsely to provide a way 
of escape to the Touchable aggressors. If he prosecutes his offenders 
before a Magistrate the fate of his proceedings could be foretold. The 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


105 


ANTAGONISM OF THE ADMINISTRATION 105 

Untouchables will never be able to get Hindus as witnesses because of the 
conspiracy of the villagers not to support the case of the Untouchables, 
however just it may be. If he brings witnesses from the Untouchables, 
the Magistrate will not accept their testimony because he can easily say 
that they are interested and not independent witnesses, or, if they are 
independent witnesses the Magistrate has an easy way of acquitting 
the accused by simply saying that the Untouchables compliment did 
not strike him as a truthful witness. He can do this fearlessly knowing 
full well that the higher tribunal will not reverse his finding because of 
the well-established rule which says that an appellate court should not 
disturb the finding of the trial Magistrate based upon the testimony of 
witness whose demeanour he had no opportunity to observe: 

That such a discrimination is practised has now been admitted even 
by Congressmen. The annual Report of the Tamil Nad Harijan Sevak 
Sangh for the year ending September 30, 1937 says 1 : 

“The political consciousness of the Harijans having been roused 
by the rights in the remotest villages where it is only the policeman 
that reign, it is not always possible for the Harijan to do this, for 
the assertion of his rights means a clash between him and the 
castemen, in which it is always the latter that have the upper 
hand. The natural consequences of this scuffle is a complaint either 
to the police or the Magistrate. The latter course is beyond the 
means of a Harijan while the former resort is worse than useless. 

The complaints are in many cases not inquired into at all, while 
in others a verdict favourable to the castemen is entered. Our 
complaints to the Police also meet with similar fate. The trouble 
seems to us to be that there is no change in the mentality of the 
lower policeman. Either he is unaware of the rights of the Harijans 
of which he is supposed to be the guardian or he is influenced by 
caste men. Or, it may also be that he is absolutely indifferent. In 
other cases, corruption is responsible for his taking the side of the 
richer caste men.” 

This shows how the Hindu official is anti-Untouchable and pro-Hindu. 
Whenever he has any authority or discretion, it is always exercised to 
the prejudice of the Untouchables. 

The police and the Magistrate are sometimes corrupt. If they were 
only corrupt, things would not perhaps be so bad because an officer who 
is corrupt is open to purchase by either party. But the misfortune is 
that the Police and Magistrates are often more partial than corrupt. It 
is this partiality to the Hindus and his antipathy to the Untouchables 

1 See ‘Hindu’ of March 7. 1938. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


106 


106 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

which results in the denial of protection and justice to the Untouchables. 
There is no cure for this partiality to the one and antipathy to the other, 
because it is founded in the social and religious repugnance which is 
inborn in every Hindu. The Police and the Magistrates by reason of 
their motives, interest and their breeding, do not sympathise with the 
living force operating among the Untouchables. They are not charged 
with the wants, the pains, the cravings and the desires which actuate 
the Untouchables. Consequently, they are openly hostile and inimical 
to their aspirations, do not help them to advance, disfavour their cause 
and snap at everything that smacks of pride and self respect. On the 
other hand, they share the feelings of the Hindus, sympathise with 
them in the attempt to maintain their power, authority, prestige and 
their dignity over the Untouchables. In any conflict between the two, 
they act as the agents of the Hindus in suppressing this revolt of the 
Untouchables and participate quite openly and shamefacedly in the 
nafarious attempt of all Hindus to do everything possible by all means, 
fair or foul, to teach the Untouchables a lesson and hold them down 
in their own places. 

The worst of it is that all this injustice and persecution can be 
perpetrated within the limits of the law. A Hindu may well say that 
he will not employ an Untouchable, that he will not sell him anything, 
that he will evict him from his land, that he will not allow him to take 
his cattle across his field without offending the law in the slightest 
degree. In doing so, he is only expressing his right. The law does not 
care with what motive he does it. The law does not see what injury 
it causes to the Untouchable. The police may misuse his power and 
his authority. He may deliberately falsify the record by taking down 
something which has not been stated or by taking down some thing 
which is quite different from what has been stated. He may disclose 
evidence to the side in which he is interested. He may refuse to arrest. 
He may do a hundred and one things to spoil the case. All this he can 
do without the slightest fear of being caught. The loopholes of law are 
many, and he knows them well. The Magistrate has vested in him 
an enormous amount of discretion. He is free to use it. The decision 
of a case depends upon the witnesses who can give evidence. But the 
decision of the case depends upon whether the witnesses are reliable or 
not. It is open to the Magistrate to believe one side and disbelieve the 
other side. He may be quite arbitrary in believing one side, but it is 
his discretion, and no one can interfere with it. There are innumerable 
cases in which this discretion has been exercised by the Magistrates to 
the prejudice of the Untouchables. However truthful the witnesses of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


107 


ANTAGONISM OF THE ADMINISTRATION 107 

the Untouchables the Magistrates take a common line by saying ‘I 
disbelieve the witnesses’, and nobody has questioned that discretion. 
What sentence to inflict is also a matter of discretion with the Magistrate. 
There are sentences which are non-appealable. An appeal is a way of 
getting redress. But this way may be blocked by a Magistrate by refusing 
to give an appealable sentence. 

If the Hindu society plays its part in maintaining the Established 
Order, so does the Hindu officials of the State. The two have made the 
Established Order impregnable. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


108 


Chapter 13 

PROBLEM OF DISCRIMINATION 


To the Untouchables the problem of discrimination in order of 
seriousness is only next to the problem of recovering their manhood. The 
discrimination against the Untouchables is practised by the Hindus on a 
scale, the extent of which it is impossible for an outsider to imagine. There 
is no field of life in which the Untouchables and the Hindus come into 
competition and in which the former is not subjected to discrimination. 
It is also of the most virulent type. 

In the matter of social relationship, it takes the form of barriers 
against dancing, bathing, eating, drinking, wrestling, worshipping. It 
puts a ban on all common cycles of participation. 

In the use of public facilities, the spirit of discrimination manifests 
itself in the exclusion of Untouchables from schools, wells, temples and 
means of conveyance. Public administration is most deeply drenched by 
the spirit of discrimination against the Untouchables. It has affected Law 
Courts, Government Departments, Co-operative Banks, particularly the 
Police. Discrimination against Untouchables in the matter of securing 
land, credit, jobs exist in the most rampant form. It is in service that 
discrimination shows itself most strongly. Though there are no regulations, 
there are well-recognized rules which govern the entry and promotion of 
the Untouchables in the matter of service. Most often an Untouchable will 
not get an entry. Whole departments are closed to them. The weaving side 
of the Textile Mills — the whole of Army — is closed to the Untouchables. 
If he did, there is a well-set limit beyond which the Untouchable may 
not rise, no matter what his efficiency or length of service. The principle 
in general is maintained that the Untouchables shall not be placed in 
administrative authority over the Hindus. The consequence is that unless 
some entire branch of service is turned over the Untouchables, there are 
very few posts of consequence which the Untouchables are allowed to 
fill. To put it concretely, the only field of service in which there is no 
discrimination against the Untouchables is scavanging. There is no need 
for discrimination in this field because the whole of it is made over to the 
Untouchables and there is no competition from the Hindus. Even here 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


109 


PROBLEM OF DISCRIMINATION 109 

discrimination steps in the matter of higher posts. All unclean work is 
done by the Untouchables. But all supervisory posts which carry higher 
salary and which do not involve contact with filth are all filled by Hindus. 
In this situation rights of citizenship cannot mean the rights of the 
Untouchables. Government of the people and for the people cannot mean 
Government for the Untouchables; equal opportunity for all cannot mean 
equal opportunity for the Untouchables; equal rights for all cannot mean 
equal rights for the Untouchables. All over the country in every nook 
and corner the Untouchable faces handicaps, suffers discriminations, is 
meted injustices to the Untouchables, the most unprivileged people in 
India. The extent to which this is true is known only to the Untouchables 
who labour under the disadvantages. This discrimination is the strongest 
barrier against the Untouchables. It prevents them from rising out of 
it. It has made the life of the Untouchables one of the constant fear of 
one thing or another, of unemployment, assault, persecution, etc. It is 
a life of insecurity. 

There is another form of discrimination which though subtle is 
nonetheless real. Under it a systematic attempt will be made to lower the 
dignity and status of a meritorious Untouchable. A Hindu leader would 
be described merely as a great Indian leader. No one would describe 
him as the leader of Kashmiri Brahmin even though he be one. If a 
leader who happens to be an Untouchable is to be referred to he will be 
described as so and so, the leader of the Untouchables. A Hindu doctor 
would be described as a great Indian doctor. No one would describe 
him as a Iyengar even though he be one. If a doctor happens to be an 
Untouchable doctor, he would be referred to as so and so, the Untouchable 
doctor. A Hindu singer would be described as a great Indian singer. If 
the same person happens to be an Untouchable he would be described 
as an Untouchable singer. A Hindu wrestler would be described as a 
great Indian Gymnast. If he happens to be an Untouchable he would 
be described as an Untouchable gymnast. 

This type of discrimination has its origin in the Hindu view that 
the Untouchables are an inferior people and however qualified, their 
great men are only great among the Untouchables. They can never be 
greater nor even equal to the great men among the Hindus. This type 
of discrimination, though social in character, is no less galling than 
economic discrimination. 

Discrimination is merely another name for absence of freedom. 
For as Mr. Tawney says 1 : “There is no such thing as freedom 

1 We mean freedom in what labour can do? pp. 83-85. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


110 


110 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

in the market, divorced from the realities of a specific time and place. 
Whatever else it may or may not imply, it involves the power of choice 
between alternatives — a choice which is real, not merely nominal, between 
alternatives which exist in fact, not only on paper. It means, in short, 
the ability to do — or refrain from doing definite things, at a definite 
moment, in definite circumstances, or it means nothing at all. Because 
a man is most a man when he thinks, wills and acts, freedom deserves 
the outline things which poets have said about it; but, as a part of the 
prose of every day life, it is quite practical and realistic. Every individual 
possesses certain requirements — ranging from the material necessities 
of existence to the need to express himself in speech and writing, to 
share in the conduct of affairs of common interests, and to worship God 
in his own way or to refrain from worshipping Him — the satisfaction of 
which it is necessary to his welfare. Reduced to its barest essential, his 
freedom consists in the opportunity secured by him, within the limits 
set by nature and the enjoyment of similar opportunities by his fellows, 
to take the action needed to order to ensure that these requirements 
are satisfied.” 

It is not my intention to add yet another catalogue of essential 
rights to the liberties of such lists which already exist; but these are 
two observations which apply to all of them. In the first place, if the 
rights are to be an effective guarantee of freedom, they must not be 
merely formed, like the right of all who can afford it to dine at the 
Ritz. They must be such that, whenever the occasion arises to exercise 
them, they can in fact be exercised. The rights to vote and to combine, 
if not wholly valueless, are obviously attentuated, when the use of 
the former means eviction and of the latter the sack; the right to the 
free choice of an occupation, if the expenses of entering a profession 
are prohibitive; the right to justice, if no poor man can pay for it; the 
right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, if the environment 
is such as to ensure that a considerable proportion of those born will 
die within twelve months, and that the happiness — investments of the 
remainder are a gambling stock. In the second place, the rights which 
are essential to freedom must be such as to secure the liberties of all, 
not merely of a minority. Some sage has remarked that marriage would 
not be regarded as a national institution if, while 5 per cent of the 
population were polygamous, the majority passed their lives unsolved 
and unencumbered by husbands or wives. The same is true of freedom. 
A society in which some groups can do much what they please, while 
others can do little of what they ought, may have virtues of its own; 
but freedom is not one of them. It is free in so far, and only in so far, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


111 


PROBLEM OF DISCRIMINATION 111 

as all the elements composing it are able in fact, and not merely in 
theory, to make the most of their powers, to grow to their full stature, 
to do what they conceive to be their duty, and — since liberty should not 
be too austere — to have their fling when they feel like it. In so far as 
the opportunity to lead a life worthy of human beings is restricted to a 
minority, what is commonly described as freedom would more properly 
be called privilege. 

The discriminations against the Untouchables are merely the reflections 
of that deep and strong Hindu sentiment which is carried over in law 
and administration which justifies the making of distinctions between 
Hindus and Untouchables to the disadvantage of the Untouchables. Those 
discriminations have their roots in fear of the Hindus that in a free field, 
the Untouchables may rise above the prescribed station in life and become 
a menace to the Hindu Social Order the cardinal principle of which is 
the maintenance of Hindu superiority and Hindu domination over the 
Untouchables. So long as the Hindu Social Order lasts, discriminations 
against the Untouchables continue to exist. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


112 


Chapter 14 

PROBLEM OF ISOLATION 


Why has the movement of the Untouchables not succeeded? Have they 
no allies? If there are allies why do they not help and co-operate with 
the Untouchables? This is a very pertinent question and it is necessary 
that it should be properly understood. For answering this question, it 
is essential to have a very clear idea of the Hindu social organisation 
and the classes of which it is composed. The structure of Hindu society 
is a very complicated one and it would be difficult for one, whose life 
has not been woven into it, to know the pattern. Perhaps, a diagramatic 
presentation may be helpful. I give below one which, in my judgment, 
facilitate the understanding of the social structure of the Hindus: 


Hindus 


Caste Hindus 


Non- Caste Hindus 


(Savarna Hindus) 


Class I Class II 


(Avarna Hindus) 


Class III Class IV 


High Caste — Dvijas 
Traivarnikas — 
Castes evolved out 
of the three varnas, 
Brahmins, Kshatriyas 
and Vaishyas 


Low Castes — Castes 
evolved out of the 
Shudra or fourth 
varna. 


1. Primitive Tribes 

2. Criminal Tribes. 


Untouchables 


The diagram shows that although there are innumerable castes 
among the Hindus, they can all be grouped under four classes. Of these 
four, Class I forms the Herenfolk or the Ruling Class, Classes III and IV 
form the subject people. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


113 


PROBLEM OF ISOLATION 113 

Let us now consider which of these classes can be the natural ally 
of the Untouchables. 

Those in Class I form the privileged classes of the Hindu society. 
The Hindu social order was created by them. They alone benefit by it 
while the aim of these in Class I is to save it. Neither by community 
of interest nor by reason of ideological affinity can the two friends and 
allies disagree. 

What about the Criminal and Primitive Tribes ? They have the 
strongest ground for over-throwing the Hindu Social Order. 

What about the Shudras? 

The laws of the Hindu Social Order are as repulsive to Class II, the 
Shudras as they are to Class IV, the Untouchables. It is interesting to 
know the status of the Shudras in the Hindu society as prescribed by 
Manu the Law-giver and the Architect of Hindu society. For an easy 
understanding of the subject, the rules regarding the status of the Shudras 
are set out below under separate heads: 

Manu asks the householders of the Brahmans, Kshatriyas and 
Vaishyas: 

IV. 61 “Let him not dwell in a country where the rulers are 
Shudras.” 

A Shudra is not to be deemed to be a respectable person. For Manu 
enacts that : 

XI. 24. “A Brahmin shall never beg from a Shudra, property for 
(performing) a sacrifice i.e., for religious purposes.” 

All marriages with the Shudra were proscribed. Marriage with a 
woman belonging to any of three other classes was forbidden. A Shudra 
was not to have a connection with a woman of the higher classes and 
an act of adultery committed by a Shudra with her was considered by 
Manu to be an offence involving capital punishment. 

VIII. 374. “A Shudra who has an intercourse with a woman of 
the higher caste guarded or unguarded shall be punished in the 
following manner; if she was unguarded, he loses the offending part; 
if she was guarded then he should be put to death and his property 
confiscated.” 

VIII. 20. A Brahmana who is only a Brahman by decent i.e., one 
who has neither studied nor performed any other act required by the 
Vedas may, at the king’s pleasure, interpret the law to him i.e., act as 
the judge, but never a Shudra (however learned he may be). 

VIII. 21. The Kingdom of that monarch, who looks on while a Shudra 
settles the law, will sink low like a cow in the morass. 

VIII. 272. If a Shudra arrogantly presumes to preach religion to 
Brahmins, the king shall have poured burning oil in his mouth and ears. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


114 


114 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

In the matter of acquiring learning and knowledge Manu ordains 
as follows: 

III. 156. He who instructs Shudra pupils and he whose teacher is a 
Shudra shall become disqualified for being invited to a Shradha. 

IV. 99. He must never read the Vedas in the presence of the Shudras. 

Manu’s successors went much beyond him in the cruelty of their 
punishment of the Shudra for studying the Veda. For instance, Katyayana 
lays down that if a Shudra overheard the Veda or ventured to utter a 
word of the Veda, the King shall cut his tongue in twain and pour hot 
molten lead in his ears. 

As to property by the Shudra, Manu enjoins as follows: 

X. 129. No superfluous collection of wealth must be made by a 
Shudra, even though he has power to make it, since a servile man, who 
has amassed riches, becomes proud, and, by his insolence or neglect, 
gives pain to Brahmins. 

VIII. 417. A Brahman may seize without hesitation, if he be in distress 
for his subsistence, the goods of his Shudra. The Shudra can have only 
one occupation. This is one of the inexorable laws of Manu. Says Manu: 

I. 91. One occupation only, the Lord prescribed to the Shudra, to 
serve meekly these other three castes (namely Brahmin, Kshatriya and 
Vaishya). 

X. 121. If a Shudra, (unable to subsist by serving Brahmana), seeks 
a livelihood, he may also seek to maintain himself by attending on a 
wealthy Vaishya. 

X. 122. But let a (Shudra) serve Brahmans, either for the sake of 
heaven, or with a view to both (this life and the next) for he who is 
called the servant of a Brahman thereby gains all his ends. 

X. 123. The service of Brahmans alone is declared (to be) an excellent 
occupation for a Shudra for whatever else besides this he may perform 
will bear him no fruit. 

Service by Shudra is not left by Manu to be regulated as a free 
contract. If the Shudra refused to serve, there is a provision for conscription 
which runs as follows: 

VIII. 413. A Brahmana may compel a Shudra, whether bought or 
unbought, to do servile work for he is created by the creator to be the 
slave of a Brahmana. 

X. 124. They must allot to him out of their own family (property) 
a suitable maintenance, after considering his ability, his industry, and 
the number of those whom he is bound to support. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


115 


PROBLEM OF ISOLATION 115 

X. 125. The remnants of their food must be given to him as well as 
their old household furniture. 

A Shudra is required by Manu to be servile in his speech and manner 
towards the other classes. 

VIII. 270. A Shudra who insults a twice born man with gross invectives 
shall have his tongue cut out; for he is of low origin. 

VIII. 271. If he mentions the names and castes of the (twice born) 
with contumely, an iron nail, ten fingers long, shall be thrust red hot 
into his mouth. 

Manu is not satisfied with this. He wants this servile status of the 
Shudra to be expressed in the names and surnames of persons belonging 
to that community. Manu says: 

II. 31. Let the first part of a Brahman’s name denote something 
auspicious, a Kshatriya’s be connected with power, and a Vaishya’s with 
wealth but a Shudra’s express something contemptible. 

II. 32. The second part of a Brahmin’s name shall be a word implying 
happiness, of a Kshatriya’s (a word) implying protection, of a Vaishya’s 
a term expressive of thriving and of a Shudra’s an expression denoting 
service.” 

It is obvious that these three classes are naturally allies. There is 
every ground for them to combine for the destruction of the Hindu Social 
Order. But they have not. It is not that no attempt has been made 
to unite them. The non-Brahmin Party which held the field between 
1919-1935 was an attempt to unite them into one political organization 
to destroy the dominance of the Brahmins who are the architects of 
the Hindu Social Order and being the chief beneficiaries of it are its 
strongest supporters. 

This was not the only attempt to bring about solidarity among the 
three classes. Another attempt is being made by the labour leaders 
particularly the Communists. They preached that there is an identity 
of interest of the working class, no matter to what community they 
belong. There must be developed in them class consciousness and class 
unity. Once united they could employ the terrifying power of their 
numbers to break down the economic order and once the economic 
order falls to the ground the social order of the Hindus is bound to go 
to pieces. What has been the result? The result is that the solidarity 
has failed to come. The Shudras and the Criminal and Primitive Tribes 
are more hostile to the Untouchables than they are to the Brahmins. 
Indeed it is the Shudras who act as the police force of the Brahmins 
for repelling the attack of the Untouchables on the Hindu social order. 
This is a strange phenomenon. But it is a fact. The atrocities that are 
committed upon the Untouchables, if they commit any breach of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


116 


116 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

rules and regulations of the established order and of which description 
has been given in earlier chapters are all the doings of the Shudras. 

The reasons for this want of solidarity is not far to seek. It is to 
be found in the system of graded inequality whereby the Brahmin 
is above everybody, the Shudra is below the Brahmin and above the 
Untouchable. If the Hindu social order was based on inequality, it would 
have been over-thrown long ago. But it is based on graded inequality 
so that the Shudra while he is anxious to pull down the Brahmin, he 
is not prepared to see the Untouchable raised to his level. He prefers 
to suffer the indignities heaped upon him by the Brahmins to join the 
Untouchables for a general levelling down of the social order. The result 
is that, there is nobody to join the Untouchable in his struggle. He is 
completely isolated. Not only is he isolated he is opposed by the very 
classes who ought to be his natural allies. This isolation is one more 
obstacle in the removal of untouchability. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


117 


PROBLEM OF ISOLATION 117 

1 APPENDICES TO BOOK 1 
APPENDIX I 

2 MATTERS MADE WORSE BY UNTOU CHABILITY 

A correspondent from Jaipur reports the following incident which 
occured in June 1953: 

“Jaipur, June 25: The guinea worm, called nahru or bala by 

people here, is a disease prevalent in the State which keeps the 

patient suffering for months, sometimes for a year or two. Many 

lose the use of a limb as a result of this disease. 

The disease spreads through the medium of drinking water. The 
only preventive steps doctors advice is that water should be drunk after 
boiling and filtering. 

The disease frequently occurs as the rains set in, which is also 
the time for sowing with the result that at a time when he should be 
preparing to earn his living a villager is confined to bed. 

On investigation in the village of Kopra near Banswara it was found 
that in 57 families there were 125 sufferers from guinea worm. There 
were six members in a Harijan family, five of whom had guinea worm. 
They had only a few bits of dry meat to eat. 

Often the trouble is thrust on these people by society. A pond from 
which Harijans drink water was so dirty that it must have been a nursery 
for the guinea worm. When showed to the Collector of Banswara he was 
shocked and ordered the pond closed immediately. 

Nearby, was a pucca well from which water could be taken by entering 
into it. Hindu were entreated to permit Harijans, to take water from 
this well but they would not agree. The Collector asked them if they 
would drink the water from the pond, if told to. They admitted that the 
water was unfit for human use, yet they would not allow Harijans use 
of the pucca well. 

Conditions are bad and Harijans are the worst sufferers. The law 
has made untouchability a crime. The Harijan Sevak Sangh has long 
been working for its oblition, but it cannot be said that the hearts and 
minds of caste Hindus in the countryside have undergone a change. The 
State Governments have not been able to do much in this connexion. 


All Press news-reports printed in Appendices to the Book I, have been found at the 
end of M.S. of this book. — E.d. 

2 It approved in the Statesman of June 27, 1953. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


118 


118 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

APPENDIX II 

From ‘Sunday Times’, March 9, 1952 

WHERE WEARING A SHIRT IS AN OFFENCE 
Woes of Harijans in S. India 
A Social Worker’s Experience 

(By Swami Anand Thirth, Regional Officer, 

All India Harijan Sevak Sangh) 

It is sad to notice that the various civil disabilities of Harijans 
still continue to exist in our villages in spite of the Civil Disabilities 
Removal Act which came into force about five years ago. It is now 9 
months since the All India Harijan Sevak Sangh started its intensive 
work for the removal of social disabilities of Harijans in Melur Taluk 
in Mathurai district. Several disabilities of Harijans regarding tea 
shops, barber saloons, wells, tanks, chavadies, etc., have been brought 
to light during this period. In some places it is the Village Munsifs 
who were expected to give wide publicity to the Act and enforce it, 
that are very reactionary forces standing in the way of the poor 
Harijans exercising their elementary rights. A few instances are cited 
below to show how deep-rooted is the prejudice against the Harijans 
in our society. 

In Parli near Natham, a Harijan youth who refused to take tea 
in a cocoanut shell and desired to be served in the glass tumbler was 
kicked and shoed on the head by a caste Hindu who was subsequently 
convicted and fined only Rs. 10 by the Sub-Magistrate, Melur. At 
Melavalvoo, when I went to a tea shop with two Harijan boys, a 
group of people threatened to assault me and drove away the boys. A 
glass tumbler was wantonly broken by the tea shopkeeper and they 
all demanded that I must pay for it on penalty of being thrashed. 
I, however, took shelter in an Elementary School nearby and the 
crowd disappeared only on the intervention of the President of the 
Panchayat Board. 

At Kelavalvoo, the Harijans take water from a dirty pond in which 
men bathe and cattle are washed. The Harijans were encouraged to go 
to the public Oorani (protected water tank), but they were abused and 
threatened by the caste Hindus so that they dare not take water from 
the Oorani. There is a Police Station at Kelavalvoo, but the police here 
are indifferent towards the disabilities of the Harijans. In Attukulam 
the caste Hindus put night-soil in the public well because they could 
not physically obstruct the Harijans who took water from it under our 
directions. In Ettimangalam, the caste Hindus destroyed the paddy 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


119 


PROBLEM OF ISOLATION 119 

seedlings raised by some Harijans in Government poromboke and because 
the Harijans had got into the chavadi during a public meeting held in 
the village. No action was taken by the police on the complaint given 
by the poor Harijans. 

In Tiruvadur when we directed Harijans to take water from the 
Oorani, a caste Hindu youth assaulted a pregnant Harijan woman and 
broke her pot as well. The caste Hindu was charged by the police and 
convicted by the Sub -Magistrate to pay a fine of only Rs. 15 and thereafter 
the Harijans are freely taking water from this Oorani. In Kottagudi, a 
village barber, who refused hair-cut to a Harijan boy was charged by the 
police and convicted by the Sub -Magistrate. But thereafter, the Harijans 
were summoned by the caste Hindus to the chavadi and warned that 
in case they sought the service of this barber, a collective fine would 
be imposed on them. 

In Kidaripatti, the Harijans are not allowed to take the corpse through 
the public foot path and they are also not permitted to ride on cycle 
through the village streets. A case regarding the alleged obstruction of 
a Harijan from riding on cycle is pending trial in the Sub -Magistrate’s 
Court, Melur. In Nundikovilpatti, only three furlongs from the Taluk 
Office, Melur, the Harijans were taking drinking water from a dirty 
channel because they had no access to the Oorani. Two complaints were 
given to the police regarding this and now the caste Hindus dare not 
obstruct the Harijans. In Thekkitheru, when the Harijans sat on the 
Manthai chavadi during a public meeting held at the chavadi, pebbles 
were thrown at them till they quitted the place out of fear. 

In Navinipatti about two miles from Melur, the village Munsif himself 
is alleged to have taken objection to the Harijans wearing-decent dress 
on Pongal festival day and made two Harijan youths to remove their 
shirts and upper cloth. The youths were made to do Kumbidal (full 
prostration on the ground) and go away in loin-cloth only. 

The most painful oppression has been in Mankulam, about ten miles 
from Mathurai city, where the village Munsif took a hostile attitude. Two 
Harijan youths went to tea shop and as they were denied admission, 
they complained to the police. For this, one of them was tied to a pillar 
and mercilessly beaten by a caste Hindu boy under instructions from 
the elders. Another Harijan was assaulted with a knife by a servant 
of the village Munsif. The Harijans were socially boycotted and denied 
labour because they took water from the public Oorani. The shopkeepers 
refused to sell provisions to them and they were put to starvation for 
two days. The situation improved only after the intervention of the 
Revenue Divisional Officer. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


120 


120 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Recently, two Harijans and myself were brutally attacked by a band 
of caste Hindus and beaten with firewood cudgels for having bathed 
in the tank and gone into a coffee club in front of the chavadi. We 
were admitted and treated in the Government Hospital in Mathurai. 
I sustained a fracture in the right foot due to which I cannot use the 
right leg and walk. Sixteen persons including the village Munsif have 
been charged by the police for rioting. Some Congress-men are, however, 
trying for a compromise because some of their relations are involved in 
this. These friends are also known to have approached the authorities 
in this connection. Mahatmaji had desired us to consider the Harijans 
as blood brothers, but alas ! blood is thicker than water. 

One feels so dejected and disheartened at the attitude of the caste 
Hindus towards the Harijans in spite of the great sacrifices of Mahatmaji, 
who won Swaraj for us and desired us to concede freedom to these down- 
trodden people as well. The Revenue and police authorities can do a lot 
to remove the disabilities of the Harijans. Mahatmaji’s son Manilal is 
offering satyagraha in South Africa for the civil disabilities of Indians. 
But we are denying similar liberties to the Harijans whom Mahatmaji 
owned as his kith and kin. Let the caste Hindus and Congressmen who 
adore Mahatmaji remember that his spirit will not rest in peace till the 
curse of untouchability is wiped out, root and branch, from the nook and 
corner of our land. The Government must realise the deed for greater 
efforts to remove this bane from our society. 

APPENDIX III 

LYNCH LAW AGAINST HARIJANS 

(Painful and shameful atrocities in Thumbapatti) 

Stop the Chavadi Courts in our Villages 

The Chavadi Courts: 

It is a well known fact that though the Harijans are denied entry 
in the public chavadies in the villages in Tamilnad, they are tried by 
the caste Hindus at these chavadies and victimised to such an extent 
that they always live in fear of the caste Hindus. One of the reasons 
why the Harijans in the villages do not respond to our movement 
of the removal of their civil disabilities is their constant fear of this 
victimisation by the caste Hindus under the leadership of the village 
Periambalagar, the chief of the caste Hindus. In several places, 
the villagers run these chavadi courts under the colour of holding 
Panchayats. The poor Harijans are summoned to the chavadi and tried 
like slaves. If any of them go against the order of the Periambalagar 
then the Lynch Law is put into operations and they are subjected to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


121 


PROBLEM OF ISOLATION 121 

merciless beating and torture with a view to strike terror in them and to 
demonstrate the absolute power of the Periambalagar. The victimisation of 
the Harijans at the chavadi takes place in various forms according to the 
circumstances and the whims of the Periambalagar and his council — public 
whipping, imposition of heavy fines and confiscation of their properties 
on failure to pay the same, foisting of false cases, economic boycott by 
denying labour and with holding wages, social ostracism by prohibiting 
their taking part in social functions and religious ceremonies, denial of 
water by preventing access to tanks and wells, denial of foodstuffs by 
banning sale of articles to them in the village-shops etc. etc. The liberation 
of the Harijans is possible only if the Government takes strong measure 
against the villagers for holding these illegal and unlawful courts in the 
name of the village panchayat. No civilised Government can tolerate the 
persecution of a backward and minority community by the villages in 
the various manners mentioned above. 

Atrocities in Thumbapatti: 

The following account of the trial of Harijans at Thumbapatti on 
1st August 1953 would make any heart bleed. This village is 22 miles 
from Madurai and it is the native place of Shri P. Kakkan, M. P., one 
of the prominent Harijan Leaders of Tamilnad. It is learnt that all the 
adults in the Harijan cherri were summoned to the mandai (common 
place) in front of the chavadi. The caste Hindus did obeisance to the 
Periambalagar and his council, in the usual manner, by doing full 
prostration, their belly touching the ground to pick up the dust. About a 
dozen Harijan youths were then picked out for trial on the charge they 
were suspected of the various petty thefts occurring in the village. It 
is however learnt that youths who were a bit assertive and not usually 
submissive to the caste Hindus had been singled out for punishment. 
They were given blows with sticks and were asked to admit having 
committed the thefts. The other Harijans were questioned and under 
fear of victimisation they are said to have thrown all the thefts on the 
accused. Judgement was passed that the youths were guilty and some 
of them were handcuffed for being duly punished. It is learnt that one 
of them however remonstrated and tried to escape on some plea. This 
disrespect to the chavadi court was immediately resented by the villagers 
and it is learnt that the Periambalagar promulgated the chavadi ordinance 
that the Harijan youths be severely dealt with. The Lynch law was put 
into operation and a most merciless attack was made on the Harijan 
youths. All those who had some grudge or prejudice against the Harijans 
got the opportunity to wreak vengeance on them with impunity. The 
Harijan youth who had tried to escape was dragged by his legs over the 
rough and stony ground. The others were beaten with sticks and tied to 
the trees and again beaten so mercilessly till their bones were almost 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


122 


122 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

broken. There they were made to stand, tied to the trees for about eight 
hours, as the pitable objects of public scorn. The Harijans in general 
appear to have been warned that they should not co-operate with the 
Harijan workers. 

False Case Foisted: 

What the villagers did thereafter is still more shameful. It is the 
usual practice to foist cases on the Harijans and to get the police to 
take immediate action. When it was discovered that the Harijans had 
sustained serious injuries, the villagers realised that they would get 
into trouble. It is learnt that Shri Poosari Kakkan, the Eighty-years old 
father of Shri P. Kakkan, M.P., who is working as the village Thotti, 
was therefore asked to give a false complaint that some articles in the 
Harijan temple were found missing since the previous evening and a 
report was sent to the Police by the village Munsif, that these articles 
were recovered from the Harijan youths. Shri Poosari Kakkan, and his 
relation, another village Thotti named Etti Kakkan, are said to have 
brought these articles and given to the village Munsif. Immediately 
on receipt of the report the Police came, arrested the Harijan youths 
on a charge of theft and sent them to the Hospital as they were found 
wounded. We do not propose to publicly criticise the action of the Police. 
Enough to say, the atrocities on the Harijans by the villagers, did not 
catch the official eye of the Police! 

The Truth Known: 

The villagers were good enough to send a mass petition supporting 
their action to Shri A. Vaidyanatha Iyer, President, Tamilnad Harijan 
Sevak Sangh. It was forwarded to me for enquiry and report. A small 
committee consisting of the President of Melur Taluk Congress Committee, 
the Secretary of Melur Taluk Harijan Sevak Sangh, the Secretary of the 
Seva Samaj, Melur and myself accordingly enquired into the matter and 
found that the villagers had made a merciless attack on the Harijan 
youths and kept them tied to the trees for about eight hours till the 
arrival of the Police. The complaint given by Shri Poosari Kakkan and the 
Periambalagar were examined by Shri Vaidyanath Iyer and they admitted 
to him that the complaint given to the Police was a false and concocted 
one. The Periambalagar also expressed regret for the wrongs done to 
the Harijans. Meanwhile the police also investigated into the complaint 
given by Shri Poosari Kakkan and referred the case as ‘undetectable’. 
No case was however taken against the villagers. It appears the bones 
of the Harijans youths had not actually broken. The marks of beatings 
with sticks and of the rope-tie were visible on their bodies for several 
days. Two of them were kept at the hospital for two days and their legs 
were X-rayed to make sure if their bones were broken. They were sent 
out with plaster bandages on their legs. They were not able to walk 
properly for a fortnight. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


123 


PROBLEM OF ISOLATION 123 

Two enquiries conducted: 

An enquiry was conducted by the Dy. Welfare Officer, Madurai 
under orders from the Dy. Collector and another enquiry was recently 
conducted by the Revenue Divisional Officer, Madurai under orders from 
the Government. The result is yet to be known. 

Civil Disabilities in Thumbapatti: 

There was terrible opposition from the villagers of Thumbapatti when 
the Harijans took water from the public Oorani in 1948. Till then the 
Harijans were taking water from a dirty pond where cattle are washed 
and men bathe. Some Harijan youths were severely beaten and an attempt 
was made to set fire to Harijan houses. The village Munsif and others 
are said to have been warned by the authorities in this connection. One 
case, where a Harijan was denied coffee in the glass tumbler in a tea 
shop in Thumbapatti, was reported to the Police on 19th August 1953 
and the tea shopkeeper was convicted and sentenced to pay a fine of 
Rs. 10 by the Sub -Magistrate. The village barber declares that he is 
willing to serve Harijans. Yet the Harijans do not go to him probably 
because of the secret warning given to them by the caste Hindus. Some 
Harijans had gone to the barber on 1st July 1953 and there is reason 
to believe that the trial of the Harijan youths on 1st August 1953 was 
an arrangement made to strike terror in the Harijans. 

Our general experience: 

It is our general experience that when the Harijans make bold to 
asset their elementary rights, the villagers summon them to the chavadi 
and persecute them in one form or other. Such happenings took place in 
Mangulam. Kuruvankulam, Adanoor, Pathiettamgudi and Karugakottai. 
The higher officials of the Police were good enough to visit these places. 
In some places, the Harijans were summoned to the chavadi and warned 
as at Kottagudi, Kidaripatti and Pullipatti. The subordinate Police 
officials usually support the caste Hindus and thus the latter get the 
freedom to apply their Lynch law and bring the Harijans to a sense of 
their social servility. 

Can we tolerate this: 

The question before us is whether we can tolerate this kind of public 
lynching and humilitation of the Harijans in these days when we had 
revolted against the atrocities of the Dyers at Jallianwalla bagh. In 
Jallianwala, the atrocities were committed by foreign bureaucrats on men 
and women who had assembled in a gathering. Here similar atrocities 
were committed by our villagers on a few Harijan youths who were tried 
at the chavadi with a view to strike terror in the Harijans in general. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


124 


124 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

What the Government must do: 

Village Panchayats consisting of elected members including Harijans, 
have been formed by the Government in the villages. One wonders 
why the caste Hindus should be allowed to run their chavadi courts in 
parallel to these Government recognised Panchayats. These chavadi courts 
are a menace to the social, economic and political progress of the poor 
backward class communities in the villages. There can be no salvation 
or freedom to the Harijans in the villages unless these chavadi courts 
are banned by the Government. All our efforts for the removal of the 
civil disabilities of Harijans will go in vain till the chavadi courts are 
prohibited from dealing with the Harijans. Before spending 3 lakhs of 
rupees for the eradication of untouchability, the Government must take 
necessary measures to stop the victimisation of the Harijans at the chavadi 
and enable them to raise their heads as human beings. Untouchability 
in public places has become a thing of the past in Kerala because of 
the non-existence of these chavadi courts in that part of the country. 

An Appeal: 

It was Mahatma Gandhi who made us realise the great injustice we 
do to poor Harijans in the villages by treating them as low castes and 
slaves. But for him the Harijans in the various parts of the country would 
have gone out of the Hindu fold because of the unbearable sufferings 
under the caste Hindus. It is now 21 years since Mahatma Gandhi 
observed the Epic Fast at Poona to create public opinion in favour of 
the Harijans. No doubt there has been a great awakening during the 
last decades and there is now general sympathy towards the Harijan 
movement. The Government is pledged to the removal of all the social 
and civil disabilities of Harijans and it is giving full cooperation to all 
peaceful and legitimate efforts to improve the status of the Harijans. 
But we have to admit that there is still, lot of prejudice towards the 
Harijans in the villages. We appeal to all public workers to bring about a 
change of heart of the caste Hindus in the villages so that the Harijans 
are no longer treated as a separate Untouchable class. We appeal to all 
leaders to work for the eradication of untouchability and to see that the 
Harijans are treated as part and parcel of the Hindu society. 

Southern Range, 

Head Office: Melur. 

Swami Anand Tirth, M.A., 
Regional Officer, 
All India Harijan Sevak Sangh. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


125 


BOOK II 


SOCIAL 


Besides the consolidated scheme on “Untouchables or 
children of India’s Ghetto” included in Book 1 in this 
Volume, there are several other essays by Dr. Ambedkar 
which deal with the subject of ‘Untouchables and 
Untouchability’. These essays are divided into three 
categories viz., Social, Political and Religious. In Book 
II, five essays have been included under “Social”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd 


MK SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


126 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


127 


Chapter 15 

CIVILIZATION OR FELONY 

I. Another cross section view of India’s population. II. Sunken 
classes seen through it : (a) Primitive Tribes, (b) Criminal 
Tribes and (c) Untouchables. III. Effect of Hindu Civilization 
on the condition of these classes. IV. Difference in the problems 
of these classes. 

The population of India is generally classified on a linguistic or on 
religious basis. These are the only two ways of classifying the people 
of India which have been persistently in vogue for a long time. The 
effect is that outsiders get the impression that, what is of interest 
and importance to know about the peoples of India is the religions 
they profess or the languages they speak. Limited by this interest, 
they remain content with a knowledge they get about the religions 
and languages that are prevalent in India. All that the outsider cares 
to hold in his head is that, in India there are people who are either 
Hindus or Mahomedans, if he is interested in religion or that there are 
people in India some of whom speak Marathi, some speak Gujarathi, 
some Bengali and some Tamil, etc. 

Of the two ways of classifying people of India the religious 
classification is the one which is more impressive and arresting for the 
foreigner. He is more interested in the religions than in the languages. 
But even he is not aware of all the religious communities in India. He 
knows only of Hindus and Mahomedans. He sometimes hears of the 
Sikhs, very seldom of Christians although they are a growing community 
and never of the Buddhists who are of course non-existent so far as 
India of today is concerned 1 . 

The impression of the foreigner is that there are only Hindus and 
Musalmans in India and that there are none others worth bothering 
about. That this should be his impression is quite natural. The air is 
filled with the din and noise of the Hindu-Moslem conflict. How grave 

‘There is a very feeble attempt at revival carried on by the Maha Bodhi Society of 
Calcutta. (This and other information is taken from Census of India, 1931, Vol. 1 Part. 3) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


128 


128 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the conflict is, can be seen from the number of Hindu-Moslem riots that 
have taken place in recent years and the casualties and deaths that 
resulted from them. 

But this struggle is a struggle for establishing an empire. There 
are Hindus who are agitating for establishing in India a Hindu Raj 
with Mahomedans as subject only. There are Mahomedans who are 
dreaming of Pan Islamism and of making India a part of a Muslim 
Empire with a choice for the Hindus between the sword and the Koran. 
In between these two extremists, there are sober persons who are for 
a state in which both Hindus and Muslims can live as equal partners. 
Whether the extremists will succeed or the moderates will succeed time 
alone can show. In the meantime the extremes in both the ; camps are 
making headlines by their blood baths. But, be that as it may, I venture 
to think that there are many who will not feel much interest in this 
struggle between the Hindus and the Mahomedans. ; After all it is a 
struggle for mastery for dominance. It is a struggle for liberation. It is 
a struggle for establishing an empire of one over the other. They will be 
more interested in the struggles of the down trodden, of those who are 
fighting to obtain the title deeds to respectable humanity. In describing 
the old quarrel between the Whigs and Tories in England, Francis 
Place in describing the political policy of the Whigs said, they were out 
to crush the king on the one hand and the people on the other hand 
and establish the aristocracy of the governing class. Those Hindus and 
Musalmans who are now fighting have the same policy in Indian politics. 
They want to establish their classes from them as the governing body. 
The masses whether of the Hindus or of the Musalmans are merely used 
for establishing the ascendency of the classes. This struggle that is going 
on is really a struggle of the classes. It is not a struggle of the masses. 

Those who are interested in the struggle of the masses must learn 
to look at the population of India from another point of view. They 
must cease to look at it purely from the point of view of religion. They 
must look at the population of India from the social and economic 
point of view. This does not mean that one need not care to know how 
religion has affected the economic and social life of the people of India. 
Indeed no study of the Indian people, be they Hindus or Musalmans, 
can give an adequate picture of their life if religion is kept out of 
consideration. Because religion is supreme in India as was the Roman 
Catholic Church in the Middle Ages in Europe. Bryce 1 has described 
the dominance of the Church over the lives of the people in terms that 
are worth recording “A life in the Church, for the Church, through the 


Holy Roman Empire. P. 367. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


129 


CIVILIZATION OR FELONY 129 

Church; a life which she blessed in mass at morning and sent to peaceful 
rest by the vesper hyme; a life which she supported by the constantly 
recurring stimulus of the sacraments, relieving it by confession, purifying 
it by penance, admonishing it by the presentation of visible objects for 
contemplation and worship, this was the life which many of the Middle 
Ages conceived of as the rightful life of the man; it was the actual life 
of many, the ideal of all”. 

The dominance of religion on the life of the people of India today is no 
whit less than the dominance of the Church over the lives of the people 
in the Middle Ages. It would therefore be a mistake to leave religion 
out of consideration. But it is equally true to say that a purely religious 
point of view would give only a superficial picture. What is important 
to know is how the masses and the classes in India live? What are the 
social and economic terms of their associated life ? To what extent are 
these influenced by religion? The answer to this question is given by the 
condition in which we find certain classes who fall within the Hindu fold. 

II 

It is a pity that Prof. Max Muller did not visit India. On seeing 
the contrast between theory and practice he might have explained the 
contrast. For the present the contrast remains a riddle. 

This is so in spite of the doctrine of Bramha, asserted by the 
Brahmins to be residing and pervading every human being. If there is 
Bramha in a Brahmin so also it is in a Primitive man, in a Criminal 
Tribes man and so also in an Untouchable ? How are these two facts to 
be reconciled — the theory of Bramha and as against it the existence of 
the Primitive Tribes, the Criminal Tribes and the Untouchables ? 

This sunken humanity falls into three distinct categories. One 
such category is comprised of people who are called Primitive Tribes. 
Communities listed as Criminal classes form a second and separate 
category and the third category is the one which covers what are called 
the Untouchables. 

The total population of persons who fall into these three categories 
is by no means small. The population of the Primitive Tribes in India 
according to the Census of 1931 comes in round figures to 25 millions. 
The total population of the Criminal classes now listed as Criminal is 
somewhere about 414 millions. The total population of the Untouchables 
according to the Census of 1931 is 50 millions in India as a whole. The 
total of these classes comes to 7914 millions. And the question is what 
is the position of these 7914 million souls ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


130 


130 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

First as to the Primitive Tribes. In what state of civilization are they? 

The name Primitive Tribes is expressive of the present state of 
people who are called by that name. They live in small scattered 
huts in forests. They live on wild fruits, nuts and roots. Fishing and 
hunting are also resorted to for the purpose of securing food. Agriculture 
plays a very small part in their social economy. Food supplies being 
extremely precarious they lead a life of semi-starvation from which 
there is no escape. As to clothes they economize them to a vanishing 
point. They move almost in a state of complete nakedness. There is a 
tribe which is known as “Bonda Porajas” which means “naked Porajas”. 
Of these people it is said that, the women wear a very narrow strip 
which serves as a petticoat almost identical with what is worn by the 
Momjak Nagas in Assam, the ends hardly meeting at the top on the 
left thigh. These petticoats are woven at home out of the fibre of a 
forest tree. Girls wear a fillet of beads and of palmyra leaf and an 
enormous quantity of beads and neck ornaments extremely like those 
worn by many Komjak women. Otherwise the women wear nothing. 

The women shave their heads entirely Of the Chenchus, a tribe 

residing near Farhabad in the Nizam’s Dominions it is said that “their 
houses are conical, rather slight in structure made of bamboos sloping 

to the central point and covered with a thinnish layer of thatch 

They have very little indeed in the way of material effects, the scanty 
clothes they wear, consisting of a langoti and a cloth in the case of 
men and a short bodice and a petticoat in the case of women, being 
practically all, besides a few cooking pots and a basket or two which 
perhaps sometimes contains grain. They keep cattle and goats and 
in this particular village do a little cultivation, elsewhere subsisting 
on honey and forest produce which they sell”. Regarding the Morias 
another Primitive Tribe, it is stated the men generally wear a single 
cloth round the waist with a flap coming down in the front. They also 
have a necklace of beads and when they dance, put cock’s plums and 
peacock’s feathers in their turbans. Many girls are profusely tattooed, 
especially on their faces, and some of them on their legs as well. The 
type of tattooing is said to be according to the taste of the individual 
and it is done with thorns and needles. In their hair, many of them 
stick the feathers of jungle cocks and their heads are also adorned with 
combs of wood and tin and brass. 

These Primitive Tribes have no prohibition against eating anything, 
even worms and insects and in fact there is very little meat that they 
will not eat, whether the animal has died a natural death or has been 
killed four days or more before by a tiger. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


131 


CIVILIZATION OR FELONY 131 

The religion of these Primitive Tribes is the worship of demons 
of all denominations and dead ancestors of all antiquity. Witchcraft, 
sorcery, animal and human sacrifice make up their religion. Without 
education, with no idea of Science or of the knowledge of the working 
of nature, steeped in ignorance and superstition, these Primitive 
Tribes have been living on the outskirts and in close conformity with 
civilization in a savage stage which has been their lot for ages. Instead 
of marching along, they are where they have been all along doing 
nothing but marking time. 

The Criminal Classes at one time included such well organized 
confederacies of Professional Criminals as the Pindharies and the Thugs. 

The Pindharies were a predatory body of armed gangsters. Their 
organization was an open military organization of freebooters who could 
muster 20,000 fine horse and even more. They were under the command 
of brigand chiefs. Chitu, one of the most powerful commanders had 
under his single command 10,000 horse, including 5,000 good cavalry, 
besides infantry and guns. The Pindharies had no military projects 
for employing their loose hands of irregular solidiery, which developed 
into bodies of professional plunderers. The Pindharies aimed at no 
conquests. Their object was to secure booty and cash for themselves. 
General loot and rapine was their occupation. They recognized no 
rulers. They were subject of none. They rendered loyalty to none. They 
respected none and plundered all high and low rich and poor without 
fear or compunction. 

The Thugs 1 were a well organized body of professional assassins, 
who in gangs of from 10 to 200 travelled in various guises throughout 
India, worked themselves into the; confidence of Wayfarers of the, 
wealthier class and, when a favourable opportunity occurred, strangled 
them by throwing a handkerchief or noose round their necks and then 
plundered and buried them. All this was done according to certain 
ancient and rigidly prescribed forms and after the performance of 
special religious rites, in which was the consecration of the pickaxe 
and the sacrifice of sugar. They were staunch worshippers of Kali, the 
Hindu Goddess of destruction. Assassination for gain was with them a 
religious duty, and was considered a holy and honourable profession. 
They had in fact no idea of doing wrong, and their moral feelings did 
not come into play. The will of the goddess by whose command and in 
whose honour they followed their calling was revealed to them through 
a very complicated system of omens. In obedience to these, they often 
travelled hundreds of miles in company with, or in the wake of their 

1 Encyclopeadia Britannica. 11th Ed.. Vol. XXVI. p. 896. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


132 


132 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

intended vicitims before a safe opportunity presented itself for executing 
their design; and when the deed was done, rites were performed in honour 
of that tutelary deity, and a goodly portion of the spoil was set apart 
for her. The Thugs had also a jargon of their own, as well as certain 
signs by which its members recognized each other in the remotest part 
of India. Even those, who from age or infirmities could no longer take 
an active part in the operations used to aid the cause as watchmen, 
spies or dressers of food. It was owing to their thorough organization, 
the secrecy and security with which they went to work, but chiefly to 
the religious garb in which they shrouded their murders, that they could 
continue for centuries to practise their craft. The extraordinary fact was 
that Thugee was regarded as a regular profession by the Indian Rulers 
both Hindu and Mahomedans. The Thugs paid taxes to the State and 
the State left them unmolested. 

It was not until the British became rulers of the country that any 
attempt was made to suppress the Thugs. By 1835, 382 Thugs were 
hanged and 986 were transported or imprisoned for life. Even as late 
as 1879 the number of registered Thugs was 344 and the Thuggee and 
the Dacoity department of the Government of India continued to exist 
until 1904 when its place was taken by the Central Criminal Intelligence 
Department. 

While these open and professional criminals have been suppressed 
and are no more to exact their toll and disturb the peace, there are still 
in India communities whose occupation is crime and who are listed by 
Government as Criminal Tribes. 

The Criminal Tribes live in the plains in close proximity, if not in 
the midst of, civilized life. Because they subsist by organized robbery and 
dacoity, they are for this reason proscribed by the Government of India as 
Criminal Tribes. Hollius in his “Criminal Tribes of the United Provinces” 
gives an account of their activities. They live entirely by crime. A few may 
be ostensibly engaged in agriculture but this is only to cover up their real 
activities. Their nefarious practices found most scope in dacoity or robbery 
by violence, but being a community organized for crime nothing came amiss 
to them. On deciding to commit a dacoity in any particular locality, spies 
would be sent out to select a suitable victim, study the general habits of 
the villagers and the distance from any effective aid, and enumerate the 
number of men and firearms. The raid usually took place at midnight. 
Acting on the information given by the spies, men would be posted at 
various points in the village and by firing off their guns, attract attention 
from the main gang which would attack the particular house or houses 
previously appointed. The gang would usually consist of 30 to 40 men. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


133 


CIVILIZATION OR FELONY 133 

It is essential to emphasize the great part played by crime in the 
general life of these peoples. A boy is initiated into crime as soon as 
he is able to walk and talk. No doubt the motive is practical to a great 
extent in so far as it is always better to risk a child in petty theft, 
who if he were caught, would probably be cuffed, while an adult would 
immediately be arrested. An important part is also played by women, 
who, although they do riot participate in the actual raids, have many 
heavy responsibilities. Besides disposing of most of the stolen property, 
they are also expert shoplifters. 

Like the Criminal Tribes the Untouchables also live in the midst 
of civilized Hindu Society and possess a degree of culture and morality 
which completely separate them from the Primitive Tribes and the 
Criminal Tribes. The Untouchables have the culture 1 of the Hindu 
Community. They observe the religious rites of the Hindu Community. 
They recognize the sacred as well as the secular laws of the Hindus. 
They celebrate the Hindu festivities. But they derive no benefit from this. 
On the contrary they are segregated and shunned because their physical 
contact is held by the Hindus to cause pollution. There is therefore an 
interdict on all social intercourse with them except for unavoidable 
purposes. They live on the outskirts of a village and not in the midst of 
it. Every village has its Untouchable quarters, they are attached to the 
village but are not a part of the village. Segregated from the rest of the 
Hindu population they are bound down to a code of behaviour which is 
appropriate to a servile state. According to this code, an Untouchable 
may not do anything which raise him above his appointed station in life. 
He should not dress in style superior to that of his status, nor should 
the untouchable woman adorn herself with ornaments after the fashion 
of the higher class Hindu women. He should not have a house better or 
bigger than the houses of the rest of the Hindus in the village. In any 
case he must not have a tiled roof over his house. An Untouchable must 
not sit in the presence of a Hindu and must always salute him first. An 
Untouchable must not wear clean clothes, must not use brass or copper 
pots and must not wear gold or silver ornaments. When some one dies 
in the family of a Hindu, an Untouchable must go miles to convey the 
message of the death to the relatives of the family, no matter how far 
away they might be living, because a Hindu in a village feels disgraced 
in the eyes of his relatives if he has to communicate such messages by 
postal communication. An Untouchable must accompany the women folk 
of the Hindus on their journey from their homes to their parents and 
vice versa. Their dignity requires that they should have a retinue and the 
Untouchable is the only available class from which such a retinue can 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


134 


134 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

be drawn without any cost. At every ceremony at the house of a Hindu, 
the Untouchables must come and do menial work An Untouchable 
must not own and cultivate land and lead an independent life. For his 
livelihood he must depend upon stale remnants of food left over by the 
Hindu households and upon meat of cattle that die in the village. These 
remnants of food he must collect from door to door. For he must goon 
his begging round every evening. Similarly an Untouchable must carry 
the dead animals out of the village. Indeed he alone must carry them 
because no Hindu will agree to do scavenging. An Untouchable should 
not take to such services as would give him authority and power over 
caste Hindus. He must be humble and must not ask for more than his 
lot under this code. It is true that some of the Untouchables have risen 
above the low status prescribed by this customary code of conduct and 
have acquired high place, but the majority of them are still socially in 
the most servile position and ~ economically in abject poverty. 

Such is the condition of the 79% millions of people. The problem 
of these deadened, if not dead, souls is no small problem. The total 
population of these three classes comes to over 60% of the population of 
the United States but exceeds the population of the whites in the British 
Empire by 9% millions. It also exceeds the population of Japan by 9% 
millions. It exceeds the population of Italy by 37 millions. It exceeds the 
population of Germany by 13% millions and of France by 37% millions. It 
is ten times the population of Belgium and twenty times the population 
of Denmark. What a colossal total of sunken humanity? 

Ill 

The saddening and if, one may say, annoying part of the story is 
that the state of these unfortunate human beings should be what it 
is although they are surrounded and fed by a high civilization. But it 
must strike any impartial observer that there must be something very 
radically wrong with a civilization which has failed to elevate to their 
manhood 79% millions of human beings. 

Civilization as comprising and accumulated store of knowledge of 
man and nature, of arts and crafts, an ethical code regulating the 
conduct of man towards his fellows, a social code laying down the forms 
and conventions to be observed by individuals, a civil code prescribing 
the rights and duties of the rulers and the ruled and a religious creed 
relating the natural to the supernatural — is a rare prize. It has not 
been the good fortune of all races to develop it in all its fullness. 
Many have stood where they were at the start. Many took one or 
two steps and have been at a halt. Others have only revolved round 
and round. The primitive races of Australia and Polenasia, when they 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


135 


CIVILIZATION OR FELONY 135 

were first discovered a few generations ago, were found to have developed 
articulate speech and to know how to make fire. They had not advanced 
beyond the middle stage of savagery. The Alliapascous, a Primitive Tribe 
of the Hudson Bay Territory and the Indians of the valley of Columbia 
had not gone beyond the stage of the Bow and the Arrow. They knew 
nothing of pottery, domestication of animals or of the smelting of 
iron. The civilization of Egypt, Babylonia, Assyria and even of Rome 
and Greece had only been a revolving civilization. Their progress and 
achievements are only the elaboration of the details of methods and 
intentions handed down by man when he was in a Barbaric state. They 
added nothing revolutionary to the sum total of civilization to which 
they were heirs. They merely did better what used to be done crudely 
by their predecessors. Nor have the stages of advancement followed in 
quick succession. That man was for long ages a savage before he made 
sufficient progress to be called a Barbarian admits of no doubt. Equally 
little in doubt is it that other long ages of Barbarism have preceded 
the final ascent to the lowest stage of civilization. The precise period of 
time covered by these successive ‘ages’ is of course only conjectural; but 
something like one hundred thousand years may perhaps be taken as 
a safe minimum estimate. 

Civilization is indeed no easy gain. But civilization is a very vital 
thing, not for one gereration but also for the next. The civilization of 
one generation, when inherited becomes the equipment of the next. This 
social heritage is absolutely essential for each generation. All progress 
will die out if this social heritage is destroyed. As has been well put, “If 
the earth were struck by one of Mr. Wells’ comets, and if in consequence 
every human being now alive were to lose all the knowledge and habits 
which he had acquired from preceding generations (though retaining 
unchanged all his own powers of invention and memory, and habituation) 
nine-tenths of the inhabitants would be dead in a month and 99 per cent 
of the remaining tenth would be dead in six months. They would have no 
language to express their thoughts but vague reverie. They would not read 
notices or drive motor cars or horses. They would wander about, led by 
the inarticulate cries of a few naturally dominant individuals, drowning 
themselves, as thirst came on, in hundreds at the riverside landing 
places. Men could not invent in time to preserve their lives, methods of 
growing food or taming animals or making fire or clothing themselves. 
Life would have to be begun over again from the primitive stage. Like 
the primitive races a generation which has lost its social heritage would 
have to begin life on wild fruits and worms until they had accumulated 
a new social heritage. After some thousands of generations they would 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


136 


136 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

probably possess some thing which would be recognized as language, 
and perhaps some art of taming animals and cultivating land. They 
might or might not have created what we should call a religion or a 
few of our simpler mechanical inventions and political expedients. They 
might or might not have such general ideas as law, liberty, justice. 
This is the difference which social heritage makes and the difference 
is no doubt vast. 

It is true that civilization is not the privilege of all and even to 
those who are fortunate to have it, it is a matter of slow growth 
marked by long and monotonous halts. But it is also true that to 
those who are possessed of civilization, their civilization may be a 
hindrance rather than a help. It might have gone on a wrong track, 
it might have based itself on false values and false premises. Such a 
civilization might easily cause stagnation of the Community and the 
stunting of the individual. It would be better to be without civilization 
than to be burdened and enshakled by such a civilization. 

It is the boast of every patriotic Hindu that the Hindu or the Vedic 
Civilization is the oldest in the world. One often hears with firesome 
repetitions a Hindu stating with a certain degree of malicious pride 
that India had reached a very high degree of civilization when other 
people were leading a primitive life and moving naked. One also hears 
a Hindu say that his civilization has inherent strength because it has 
survived while all other ancient civilization such as Egypt, Babylon, 
Judea, Rome and Greece have vanished. Such a view however legitimate 
misses the main point. The main point is not whether the civilization 
is ancient and whether it has survived . 1 The main point is what are 
the merits of a civilization ? What is its worth, if it has survived, on 
what plain? In other words the principal question is, is this Hindu 
civilization, the social heritage a burden or a benefit ? What does it 
offer by way of growth and expansion to classes and to individuals ? 

What is the contribution of Hindu Civilization to the knowledge 
of man and nature ? Many patriotic Hindus like to believe that the 
knowledge of man and nature began with the Hindus. Granting that 
it is so it certainly did not advance beyond the most rudimentary 
stage. Can any Hindu doubt that the Hindu Philology, right or wrong, 
has remained where Panini and Katyayana left it ? Can he deny that 
Philosophy right or wrong has remained where Kapila and Gautama 
left it? Can he doubt that literature remained where Vyasa and 
Valmiki left it. In Metaphysics the Hindus are said to have reached the 

1 See my ‘Annihilation of Caste’ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


137 


CIVILIZATION OR FELONY 137 

stage of perfection. This is what Prof. Har Dayal has to say of Hindu 
Metaphysics 1 — 

“Metaphysics has been the curse of India. It has blighted her 
history and compassed her ruin. It has converted her great men 
into miserable quibblers, and led them into useless channels of 
inquiry and effort. It has been the dangerous will-o’-the-wisp of 
Indian intellect during many centuries. It has elevated sophistry to 
the rank of an Art, and substituted vain fancies for a knowledge. 

It has condemned Indians intellect to run in the same old roove 
for hundreds of years. It has blinded her seers and led them to 

mistake phantoms for realities Arrogant, pretentious, verbose 

and purblind, it has taken its cackling for an oracle and its fantastic 
word towers for solid piles of thought masonry ” 

“ The Upanishads claim to expound ‘that by knowing which 

every thing is known’. This mediaeval quest for ‘the absolute’ is the 
basis of all the superior metaphysics of India. The treatises are full 
of absurd conceits, quaint fancies, and chaotic speculations. And we 
have not yet learned that they are worthless. “Samadhi” or trance 
is regarded as the acme of spiritual progress ! How strange it is 
that a capacity for swooning away should be considered the mark 
of wisdom ! It is very easy to lose consciousness if one has strong 
emotions and a feeble intellect. That is why ladies faint so often on 
the slightest provocation. But in India Samadhi is the eighth stage 
of Yoga, which only ‘paramahans’ can reach. These be thy Gods, O, 
Israel! To look upon an abnormal psychological condition produced 
by artificial means as the sign of enlightenment was a folly reserved 
for Indian Philosophers.” 

In the domain of science, Arts and crafts the contribution of the 
Hindu Civilization is of the most primitive character. Except in some 
spheres such as weaving, spinning, etc., the Hindu Civilization has not 
evolved any technical equipment which can aid man in his struggle 
against nature to make a bare living that can be said to be higher than 
that of the brute. It is because of the complete absence of scientific 
and technical equipment and with all the transcendental nonsense that 
is being perpetrated that famines are desolating the land in all ages. 
Ignorance, superstition and disease which affect the mind, malaria and 
plague diseases which affect the body, have hung like a pall over the 
country throughout the ages. 

In the field of Religion and Ethics the Hindus have made their 
greatest efforts. Of their contributions, these are the most elaborately 
developed. They are undoubtedly the most vital to man for the simple 
reason that they help to install in man the springs of thought and 


Modem Review. July 1912. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


138 


138 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

action. They are responsible for the outlook which man has on life. 
They are responsible for the attitude one holds towards his fellow man. 
They prescribe principles which govern conduct, mould character and 
implant in man that mysterious thing called conscience which acts 
as his sentinel and prevents him from going wrong. 

It is when one comes to examine this Hindu Civilization in the 
matter of its religious content, the way of life it prescribes, that 
one begins to doubt whether this Hindu Civilization is at all an 
advantage to the generations who are fated to. inherit it. What does 
this civilization offer to the 25 millions of Primitive Tribes who are 
living on its frontiers ? What does it offer to the 5 millions of Criminal 
Tribes who are living in the midst of that civilization? What does it 
offer to the 50 millions of Untouchables who are not only living in 
the midst of that civilization but are required to sustain it ? What 
would the Primitive Tribes say of a civilization which has made no 
effort to adopt them in its fold ? What would the Criminal Tribes say 
of a civilization which has driven them to take to criminal ways for 
earning their livelihood ? Would it be unjust if they said that this is 
not Civilization, this is infamy ? 

As to the Untouchables, theirs has been a fate of degradation and 
destitution in the past and for whom under the Hindu Civilization 
there seems to be no escape in the future. Even Indians do not seem 
to realize the extent of degradation and destitution that is involved 
in this system of Untouchability. The observations of the Committee 
appointed by the Government of Bombay to inquire into the grievances 
of the Depressed Classes and Aboriginal Tribes in 1928 are very 
pertinent. It said. 

“There is nothing strange in the idea that an unclean person 
or thing causes repulsion which underlies the idea of pollution. But 
what is regrettable about it as applied to the (UNTOUCHABLES), 
is its irrationality. It stamps an individual as untouchable by the 
mere accident of his birth. A person born Untouchable, remains 
Untouchable however superior he may be in personal cleanliness 
to the so-called touchable, and there is no way open to him by 
which he can escape his fate. What is surprizing in all this is 
that an Orthodox Hindu, notwithstanding the differences between 
his religious notions and mode of living and outlook in life and 
those of the Mahomedans, Parsis and Christians treat them as 
touchables. This has resulted in further aggravating the position of 
the (Untouchables). For this unjust discrimination on the part of the 
Orthodox Hindus, in some cases being influenced by the Orthodox 
Hindus especially in villages, even the Mahomedans, Parsis and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


139 


CIVILIZATION OR FELONY 


139 


Christians observe untouchability towards the (Untouchables) though 
their religions teach contrariwise. What we are concerned most to 
point out are the evils attributable to it in so far as Untouchability 
includes isolation and inferiority. But there are evils specifically 
attributable to untouchability as such. Pressed to its logical limit, 
in an Orthodox Hindu Society it would prevent the (Untouchables) 
from obtaining entry into a public school though it is maintained at 
the expense of the state, it would prevent them from entering the 
public services though they may be qualified for it, except for the 
services customarily allotted to them. It would also prevent them 
from taking water from the public watering places maintained out 
of public funds. Looked at from this point of view untouchability is 
not merely a social problem. It is a problem of the highest political 
importance and affects the fundamental question of the civic rights 
of the subjects of the state.” 

This states the hardships only of the Untouchables. But untouchables 
are not the only people who are subjected to this life of ignominy. 
There are classes who are placed in a worse position. Untouchables 
are those who cause pollution only by a physical touch. There are 
people who cause pollution if they come within a certain distance. 
They are known as unapproachables. Again there are people who are 
in a worse position than the unapproachables. They cause pollution if 
they come within sight. They are known as unseeable. It is said of the 
Nayadis 1 — a people who fall into the category of the unapproachables, 
“that they are the lowest caste among the Hindus — the dogeaters. They 
are the most persistent in their clamour for charity, and will follow at 
a respectful distance, for miles together any person walking, driving 
or boating. If any thing is given to them, it must be laid down, and 
after the person offering it has proceeded a sufficient distance, the 
recipient comes timidly forward, and removes it.” Of the same people 
Mr. Thurston says “The subject (i.e. the Nayadis) whom I examined and 
measured at Shoranur, though living only about three miles off had, 
by reason of the pollution which they traditionally carry with them to 
avoid walking over the long bridge which spans the river, and follow 
a circuitous route of many miles”. 

In the Tinnevalley District of the Madras Presidency, there is a class 
of unseeables called Purada Vannas. Of them it is said, “that they are 
not allowed to come out during day time because their sight is enough 
to cause pollution. These unfortunate people are ‘compelled’ to follow 
the nocturnal habits, leaving their dens after dark and scuttling home 
at the false dawn like the badger, hyaena, aordvark.” 


Malabar Manual. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


140 


140 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

What must be the hardships of the unapproachables and unseeables ? 
How must they be passing their lives ? If their sight or their approach 
even is not tolerated, what work can they obtain ? What else can they 
do except to beg and live on dog’s meat ? Surely no civilization can be 
guilty of greater cruelty! It is indeed a great mercy that the population 
of the unapproachables and of the unseeables is so small. But are 
50 millions of Untouchables entitled to any civilization ? 

An Untouchable cannot escape his fate for he cannot pass off as a 
Touchable. In the village where he resides he is of course known and 
there is no room for impersonation while he is there. If he leaves his 
village and comes to a town there is a chance for him to pass off as 
Touchable. But he knows what would be his fate if he were discovered. 

The following incident which was reported in the papers will give 
some idea of the risk involved in any attempt to impersonate: 

** Orthodoxy Run Mad. 

Alleged Barbarious Treatment of “Untouchables”: Crime of being 

Mahars. 

Mr. Keshavji Ranchhodji Vaghela from Ahmedabad has informed 
Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, President, Bahishkrit Hitkarani Sabha as follows: 

One Bapoorao Laxman and his brother Kaurao have been 
residents of Ahmedabad during the last six years. They used to 
mix with some people from the Deccan belonging to Maratha caste. 
Kaurao’s two sons, viz, Damoo and Laxman, used to take part in 
the Bhajan parties of the Marathas. The latter, however, recently 
came to know that the brothers Damoo and Laxman were Mahars 
by caste and in order to ascertain this, two Mahars employed in the 
parcel train between Surat and Ahmedabad were specially called to 
identify Damoo and Laxman. After it was ascertained that Damoo 
and Laxman were Mahars they were called at a Bhajan party at 
Kalupur, Bhandari Pole, at midnight on the 11th instant. Asked as 
to what caste they belonged to, Damoo and Laxman replied that 
they were Somavanshis. This reply enraged the Marathas, who 
freely abused them for having defiled their persons and places. 

The Mahar brothers were assaulted by the Marathas. One of the 
brothers had a gold ring on his person. It was forcibly taken away 
from him and sold for Rs. 11. Out of this amount Rs. 6 was paid to 
the Mahar who had been called from Surat to identify the brothers. 
Damoo and Laxman entreated and Marathas were requested to 
allow them to return to their homes, but the latter refused to 
do so unless a fine of Rs. 500 was paid. On the Mahar brothers 
** Bombay Chronicle 25th Feb. 1938. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


141 


CIVILIZATION OR FELONY 141 

pleading their inability to pay such a heavy sum, one of the Marathas 
suggested that the Mahar brothers should be fined only Rs. 125. 

But then one of the Marathas opposed the proposal for fine saying 
that they should not be satisfied with fine, but should punish the 
Mahars severely for their crime of concealing their caste. Having 
decided upon the course, the Mahar brothers were detained and at 
about 9 o’clock in the morning they were subjected to barbarous 
indignities, their moustaches in the left side and eyebrows on the 
right side were shaved, their bodies besmeared with soot mixed in 
oil and also with dirt, garlands made of old shoes were put around 
their necks, and one of them was asked to hold a broom in his hand 
and the other to hold a placard on which it was written that the 
punishment was meted out to the culprits for venturing to touch 
high caste people. The Mahar brothers were taken in procession 
consisting of about 75 people, a drum being beaten in the front. 

A complaint has been lodged with the Police by the said two Mahar 
brothers. The accused in their statement have admitted that Damoo 
and Laxman were treated in the alleged manner, but pleaded that the 
complainants had willingly agreed to undergo the punishment. Obviously 
Damoo and Laxman were helpless when they were abused, assaulted and 
threatened with severe punishment and actually subjected to barbarious 
indignities. This case has created a great sensation among the people 
belonging to the so called Untouchables castes, and efforts are being 
made to give proper legal aid to the complainants. But the rules of 
this Hindu Civilization are so meticulous in regard to untouchability 
as to leave no possibility for an Untouchable to pose as a Touchable. 
Consequently there exist rules in certain areas where Untouchables 
are required to bear a black thread so as to be easily identifiable and 
to proclaim by word of mouth that he is an Untouchable to prevent 
a Touchable touching him in ignorance and thereby getting himself 
polluted. In the town of Dwarka (in the Bombay Presidency) which 
is famous as being the shrine of the great Hindu God Krishna it is a 
rule that every Untouchable while walking in the streets has to clap 
his hands and say “Post, Post” so as to proclaim the fact that he is an 
Untouchable and let the Touchables beware of him. The following is 
recorded of the Cherumans of the Madras Presidency: 

“Very low is indeed the social position of these miserable beings. 
When a Cheruman meets a person of superior caste he must stand 
at a distance of thirty feet. If he comes within this prohibited 
distance, his approach is to cause pollution, which is removed only by 
bathing in water. A Cheruman cannot approach a Brahmin village or 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


142 


142 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

temple or tank. If he does so, purification becomes necessary. Even 
while using the public road, if he sees his lord and master, he has 
to leave the ordinary way and walk, it may be in the mud, to avoid 
his displeasure by accidently polluting him. To avoid polluting the 
passerby, he repeats the unpleasant sound, “O, Oh, O” — In some 
places i.e. Palghat, one may see a Cheruman with a dirty piece of 
cloth spread on the road side, and yelling in a shrill voice, “Ambrane, 
Ambrane, give me some pice and throw them on the cloth”. His 
position is intolerable in the Native States of Cochin and Travancore, 
where the Brahaman influence is in the ascendent, while in the 
Palghat Taluka the Cherumans cannot, even to this day enter the 
bazaar. In Malabar it is stated that ** “The man of high caste shouts 
occasionally as he goes along, so that the low caste man can go off 
the road, and allow him to pass unpolluted. And those of the lowest 
castes shout, as they go, to give notice of their Pollution bearing 
presence, and learning the command of the man of high caste, move 
away from the road. It is common to see people of inferior caste 
travelling parallel to the road, but not daring to go along it”. 

What a degradation for these unfortunate souls who have been turned 
by this Hindu Civilization into social lepers! To be called an Untouchable 
is enough of a misfortune. But to require an Untouchable to proclaim 
by his own mouth his shame that he is an Untouchable is a cruelty to 
which in my opinion there is no parallel. What would an Untouchable 
say of this Hindu Civilization ? Would it be wrong if he said that it is 
felony and not civilization? 

That the condition of the Primitive Tribes, of the Criminal Tribes 
and of the Untouchables is the result of fundamental doctrines of Hindu 
Civilization there can be no manner of doubt. 

Why have there been no missions to bring these Primitive Tribes 
into the Hindu fold? 

Why has crime become an occupation for certain tribes ? Why 
have certain classes been treated as unfit for human association, as 
Untouchables ? 

The answer to each of these questions will have reference to some 
basic principle of the Hindu Civilization. 

To the first question the answer is that the caste system prevents 
the Hindu Religion from becoming a missionary religion and caste is 
a fundamental part of the Hindu Civilization. To the second question 
the answer is that the system of Chaturvarna limits the opportunities 
which a person can have for earning an honourable living. All learned 
are the preserve of the Brahmins; all warlike services are the monopoly 
**Thurston — Tribes and castes of Southern India, Vol. 5, p. 196. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


143 


CIVILIZATION OR FELONY 143 

of the Kshatriya class; trade is open only to Vaishya, services to the 
Shudras. Those outside, there being nothing honourable left, have been 
driven to dishonourable and criminal ways of earning a livelihood. This 
is the result of Chaturvarna and Chaturvarna is again a fundamental 
part of Hindu Civilization. 

To the third question the answer is that untouchability is part of the 
Hindu law as contained in the Smritis which are again a fundamental 
part of the Hindu Civilization. 

IV 

It is true that as for the past the state of degradation has been the 
common fate of all the three categories of these 79hi millions of India’s 
population. But it cannot be said that their future destiny will also be 
common to them. That is because although their condition is apparently 
similar, their position is essentially different. 

The first thing to note is that the Primitive Tribes and the Criminal 
Tribes are not afflicted by this system of untouchability. To. a Hindu 
they do not cause pollution. Indeed these Primitive and Criminal Tribes 
observe untouchability towards the Untouchables. The situation is full 
of humour when one sees members of these Primitive and Criminal 
Tribes feeling that they would be polluted if they would touch an 
Untouchable. They are poor, filthy, superstitious, ignorant, far more than 
the Untouchables yet they pride themselves as socially superior to the 
Untouchables. This of course is the result of the contagion which they 
have from the Hindus. But the point to note is that the Hindu does not 
treat them as Untouchable. That is an advantage which they have over 
the Untouchables and which makes their future assured. If the Primitive 
Tribes have no opportunities for advancement it is because they choose 
to live in isolation. But once they come out of their forest recesses and 
take part in civilization, there is nothing that will stand in their way. 
Similarly the Criminal Tribes have their future assured. Government 
have established settlements where these Criminal Tribes are kept and 
taught useful trades. There is no doubt that in a very short time they 
will be completely weaned from their vicious habits. 

The case of the Untouchables stands on quite a different footing 
altogether. Their disabilities are imposed upon them. Their isolation 
is really segregation which is enforced upon them. The problem of the 
Untouchables is different from the problem of the Primitive Tribes 
because in their case the evils of segregation are aggravated by the 
fact of untouchability and the result is that while in the case of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


144 


144 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Primitive Tribes the problem is due to geographical isolation combined 
with lack of desire to avail themselves of the opportunities for betterment, 
in the case of the Untouchables the problem is due to positive denial 
of opportunities. 

There does not seem to be much hope for the emancipation of the 
Untouchables, at any rate their emancipation is far more problematical 
and distant than the emancipation of the Primitive Tribes. The problem 
of the slaves was one of denial of political or economic rights. If the 
problem of the Untouchables was one of denial of political and economic 
rights it could be solved by legal and constitutional methods. The denial 
of political and economic rights is the result of the social psychology of 
the Hindus. The problem for the Untouchables arises directly out of the 
social behaviour of the Hindus. Untouchability will vanish only when 
Hindus will change their mentality. The problem is how to make the 
Hindus unlearn their way of life. It is no small matter to make a whole 
nation give up its accustomed way of life. Besides the way of life the 
Hindus are accustomed to, is a way which is sanctified by their religion, 
at any rate they believe it to be so. To change their way of life is almost 
to change their religion. 

How can this happen ? Only when it is realised that what is tragedy 
for the Untouchables is the crime of the Hindus. How long shall the 
Untouchables have to wait for this revolution in the religious psychology 
of the Hindus? Let those who have a gift for prophecy answer. In the 
meantime it would be desirable to describe their condition and to state 
the problems which they arid their friends have to face. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


145 


Chapter 16 

THE HOUSE THE HINDUS HAVE 
BUILT 

1 

Is there any thing peculiar in the social organization of the Hindus? 
An unsophisticated Hindu who is unaware of investigations conducted by 
scholars will say that there is nothing peculiar, abnormal or unnatural 
in the organization of the society to which he belongs. This is quite 
natural. People who live their lives in isolation are seldom conscious of 
the peculiarities of their ways and manners. People have gone on from 
generation to generation without stopping to give themselves a name. 
But how does the social organization of the Hindu strike the outsiders, 
non-Hindus? Did it appear to them as normal and natural? 

Megasthenese who came to India as the ambassador of the Greek 
King Seleukos Nickator to the Court of Chandragupta Maurya some 
time about the year 305 B.C. did feel that the social organization of the 
Hindus was of a very strange sort. Otherwise he would not have taken 
such particular care to describe the peculiar features of the Hindu social 
organization. He has recorded : 

“The population of India is divided into seven parts. The 
philosophers are first in rank, but form the smallest class in point of 
number. Their services are employed privately by persons who wish 
to offer sacrifices or perform other sacred rites, and also publicly 
by the kings at what is called the Great Synod, wherein at the 
beginning of the new year all the philosophers are gathered together 
before the King at the gates, when any philosopher who may have 
committed any useful suggestion to writing, or observed any means 
for improving the crops and the cattle, or for promoting the public 
interests, declares it publicly. If any one is detected giving false 
information thrice, the law condemns him to be silent for the rest 
of his life, but he who gives sound advice is exempted from paying 
any taxes or contributions. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


146 


146 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“The second caste consists of the husbandmen, who form the 
bulk of the population, and are in disposition most mild and 
gentle. They are exempted from military service, and cultivate 
their lands undisturbed by fear. They never go to town, either to 
take part in its tumults, or for any other purpose. It therefore not 
unfrequently happens that at the same time, and in the same part 
of the country, men may be seen drawn up in array of battle, and 
fighting at risk of their lives, while other men close at hand are 
ploughing and digging in perfect security, having these soldiers to 
protect them. The whole of the land is the property of the King, 
and the husbandmen till it on condition of receiving one-fourth of 
the produce. 

“The third caste consists of herdsmen and hunters, who alone are 
allowed to hunt, and to keep cattle, and to sell draught animals or 
let them out on hire. In return for clearing the land of wild beasts 
and fowls which devour the seeds sown in the fields, they receive 
an allowance of grain from the king. They lead a wandering life 
and live under tents. 

“The fourth class, after herdsmen and hunters, consists of those 
who work at trades, of those who vend wares, and of those who are 
employed in bodily labour. Some of these pay tribute, and render 
to the State certain prescribed services. But the armour-makers 
and shipbuilders receive wages and their victuals from the king, 
for whom alone they work. The general in command of the army 
supplies the soldiers with weapons, and the admiral of the fleet 
lets out ships on hire for the transport both of passengers and 
merchandise. 

“The fifth class consists of fighting men, who when not engaged 
in active service, pass their time in idleness and drinking. They 
are maintained at the King’s expense, and hence they are always 
ready, when occasion calls, to take the field, for they carry nothing 
of their own with them but their own bodies. 

“The sixth class consists of the overseers, to whom is assigned 
the duty of watching all that goes on, and making reports secretly 
to the King. Some are entrusted with the inspection of the city, 
and others with that of the army. The former employ as their 
coadjutors the courtezans of the city, and the latter the courtezans 
of the camp. The ablest and most trustworthy men are appointed 
to fill these offices. 

“The seventh class consists of the councillors and assessors 
of the king. To them belong the highest posts of government, the 
tribunals of justice, and the general administration of public affairs. 
No one is allowed to marry out of his own caste, or to exchange one 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


147 


THE HOUSE THE HINDUS HAVE BUILT 147 


profession or trade for another, or to follow more than one business. 

An exception is made in favour of the philosopher, who for his virtue 
is allowed this privilege.” 

Alberuni who wrote an account of his travels in India some time 
about 1030 A.D. must have been struck by the peculiarity of the Hindu 
Social Organization. For he too has not omitted to make a note of it. 
He observed: 

“The Hindus call their castes varna, i.e. colours, and from a 
genealogical point of view they call them jataka, i.e. births. These 
castes are from the very beginning only four. 

I. The highest caste are the Brahmana, of whom the books of the Hindus 
tell that they were created from the head of Brahman. And a Brahman 
is only another name for the force called nature, and the head is the 
highest part of the animal body, the Brahmana are the choice part of 
the whole genus. Therefore the Hindus consider them as the very best 
mankind. 

II. The next caste are the Kshatriya, who were created, as they say, from 
the shoulders and hands of Brahman. Their degree is not much below 
that of the Brahmana. 

III. After them follow the Vaisya, who were created from the thigh of 
Brahman. 

IV. The Sudra, who were created from his feet. 

“Between the latter two classes there is no very great distance. 
Much, however, as these classes differ from each other, they live 
together in the same towns and villages, mixed together in the same 
houses and lodgings. 

“After the Sudra follow the people called Antyaja, who render 
various kinds of services, who are not reckoned amongst any caste, 
but only as members of a certain craft or profession. There are 
eight classes of them who freely intermarry with each other, except 
the fuller, shoemaker and weaver, for no others would condescend 
to have anything to do with them. These eight guilds are the 
fuller, shoemaker, juggler, the basket and shield maker, the sailor, 
fisherman, the hunter of wild animals and of birds, and the weaver. 

The four castes do not live together with them in one and the same 
place. These guilds live near the villages and towns of the four 
castes, but outside them. 

“The people called Hadi, Doma (Domba), Candala and Badhatau 
(sic) are not reckoned amongst any caste or guild. They are occupied 
with dirty work, like the cleansing of the villages and other services. 
They are considered as one sole class, and distinguished only by 
their occupations. In fact, they are considered like illegitimate 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


148 


148 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


children; for according to general opinion they descend from a Sudra 
father and a Brahmani mother as the children of fornication; therefore 
they are degraded outcaste. 

“The Hindus give to every single man of the four castes 
characteristic names, according to their occupations and modes of 
life, e.g. the Brahman is in general called by this name as long as 
he does his work staying at home. When he is busy with the service 
of one fire, he is called Ishtin; if he serves three fires, he is called 
Agnihotrin; if he besides offers an offering to the fire, he is called 
Dikshita. And as it is with the Brahmana, so is it also with the 
other castes. Of the classes beneath the castes, the Hadi are the 
best spoken of, because they keep themselves free from everything 
unclean. Next follow the Doma, who play on the lute and sing. The 
still lower classes practise as a trade killing and the inflicting of 
judicial punishments. The worst of all are the Badhatau, who not 
only devour the flesh of dead animals, but even of dogs and other 
beasts. 

“Each of the four castes, when eating together, must form a 
group of themselves, one group not being allowed to comprise two 
men of different castes. If, further, in the group of the Brahmana 
there are two men who live at enmity with each other, and the seat 
of the one is by the side of the other, they make a barrier between 
the two seats by placing a board between them, or by spreading 
a piece of dress, or in some other way; and if there is only a line 
drawn between them, they are considered as separated. Since it is 
forbidden to eat the remains of a meal, every single man must have 
his own food for himself; for if any one of the party who are eating 
should take of the food from one and the same plate, that-which 
remains in the plate becomes, after the first eater has taken part, 
to him who wants to take as the second, the remains of the meal, 
and such is forbidden.” 

Alberuni did not merely content himself with recording what struck 
him as peculiar in the Hindu Social organization. He went on to say: 

“Among the Hindus institutions of this kind abound. We Muslims, 
of course, stand entirely on the other side of the question, considering 
all men as equal, except in piety; and this is the greatest obstacle 
which prevents any approach or understanding between Hindus 
and Muslims.” 

Duarte Barbosa who was Portuguese official in the service of the 
Portuguese Government in India from 1500 to 1517 has left a record of 
his impressions of Hindu Society. This is what struck him: 

“And before this kingdom of Guzerate fell into the hands of the 
Moors, a certain race of Heathen whom the Moors called Resbutos 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


149 


THE HOUSE THE HINDUS HAVE BUILT 

dwelt therein, who in those days were the knights and wardens of 
the land, and made war wheresoever it was needful. These men kill 
and eat sheep and fish and all other kinds of food; in the mountains 
there are yet many of them, where they have great villages and 
obey not the king of Guzerate, but rather wage daily war against 
him: who, do what he may, is yet not able to prevail against them, 
nor will do so, for they are very fine horsemen, and good archers, 
and have besides divers other weapons to defend themselves withal 
against the Moors, on whom they make war without ceasing; yet 
have they no king nor lord over them. 

“And in this kingdom there is another sort of Heathen whom 
they call Baneanes, who are great merchants and traders. They 
dwell among the Moors with whom they carry on all their trade. 
This people eat neither flesh nor fish, nor anything subject to death; 
they slay nothing, nor are they willing even to see the slaughter of 
any animal; and thus they maintain their idolatry and hold it so 
firmly that it is a terrible thing. For often it is so that the Moors 
take to them live insects or small birds, and make as though to kill 
them in their presence, and the Baneanes buy these and ransom 
them, paying much more than they are worth, so that they may 
save their lives and let them go. And if the King or a Governor of 
the land has any man condemned to death, for any crime which 
he has committed, they gather themselves together and buy him 
from justice, if they are willing to sell him, that he may not die. 
And divers Moorish mendicants as well, when they wish to obtain 
alms from this people, take great stones wherewith they beat upon 
their shoulders and bellies as though they would slay themselves 
before them, to hinder which they give them great alms that they 
may depart in peace. Others carry knives with which they slash 
their arms and legs, and to these too they give large alms that 
they may not kill themselves. Others go to their doors seeking to 
kill rats and snakes for them, and to them also they give much 
money that they may not do so. Thus they are much esteemed by 
the Moors ! 

“When these Baneanes meet with a swarm of ants on the road 
they shrink back and seek for some way to pass without crushing 
them. And in their houses they sup by daylight, for neither by night 
nor by day will they light a lamp, by reason of certain little flies 
which perish in the flame thereof; and if there is any great need of 
a light by night they have a lantern of varnished paper or cloth, so 
that no living thing may find its way in, and die in the flame. And if 
these men breed many lice they kill them not, but when they trouble 
them too much they send for certain men, also Heathen, who live 


149 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


150 


150 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

among them and whom they hold to be men of a holy life; they 
are like hermits living with great abstinence through devotion 
to their gods. These men louse them, and as many lice as they 
catch they place on their own heads and breed them on their own 
flesh, by which they say they do great service to their Idol. Thus 
one and all they maintain with great self-restraint their law of 
not killing. On the other hand they are great usurers, falsifiers 
of weights and measures and many other goods and of coins; and 
great liars. These heathen are tawny men, tall and well looking, 
gaily attired, delicate and moderate in their food. Their diet is of 
milk, butter, sugar and rice, and many conserves of divers sorts. 
They make much use of dishes of fruit and vegetables and pot 
herbs in their food. Wheresoever they dwell they have orchards 
and fruit gardens and many water tanks wherein they bathe 
twice a day, both men and women; and they say when they have 
finished bathing that they are clear of as many sins as they have 
committed up to that hour. These Baneanes grow very long hair, 
as women do with us, and wear it twisted up on the head and 
made into a knot, and over it a turban, that they may keep it 
always held together; and in their hair they put flowers and other 
sweet scented things. 

“They use to annoint themselves with white sandalwood mixed 
with saffron and other scents. They are very amorous people. 
They are clad in long cotton and silken shirts and are shod with 
pointed shoes of richly wrought cordwain; some of them wear short 
coats of silk and brocade. They carry no arms except certain very 
small knives ornamented with gold and silver, and this for two 
reasons: First, because they are men who make but little use of 
weapons; and secondly, because the Moors defend them. 

“Bramenes. And there is here another class of Heathen whom 
they call Bramenes, who are priests among them and persons who 
manage and rule their houses of prayers and idol-worship, which 
are of great size and have great revenues; and many of them also 
are maintained by alms. In these houses are great numbers of 
wooden Idols, and others of stone and copper and in these houses 
or monasteries they celebrate great ceremonies in honour of these 
idols, entertaining them with great store of candles and oil lamps, 
and with bells after our fashion. These Bramenes and Heathen have 
in their creed many resemblances to the Holy Trinity, and hold in 
great honour the relation of the Triune Three, and always make 
their prayers to God, whom they confess and adore as the true God, 
Creator and maker of all things, who is three persons and one God 
and they say that there are many other gods who are rulers under 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


151 


THE HOUSE THE HINDUS HAVE BUILT 

him, in whom also they believe. These Bramenes and heathen 
wheresoever they find our churches enter them and make prayers 
and adorations to our Images, always asking for Santa Maria, 
like men who have some knowledge and understanding of these 
matters; and they honour the Church as is our manner, saying 
that between them and us there is little difference. These men 
never eat anything subject to death, nor do they slay anything. 
Bathing they hold to be a great ceremony and they say that by it 
they are saved. 

“There is also in this same Kingdom of Calicut a caste of people 
called Bramenes who are priests among them (as are the clergy 
among us) of whom I have spoken in another place. 

“These all speak the same tongue, nor can any be a Bramene 
except he be the son of a Bramene. When they are seven years of 
age they put over their shoulder a strip of two fingers in breadth 
of untanned skin with the hair on it of a certain wild beast which 
they call Cryvamergam, which resembles a wild ass. Then for 
seven years he must not eat betel for which time he continues to 
wear this strap. When he is fourteen years old they make him a 
Bramene, and taking off their leather strap they invest him with 
the cord of three strands which he wears for the rest of his life 
as a token that he is a Bramene. And this they do with great 
ceremonial and rejoicings, as we do here for a cleric when he 
sings his first mass. Thereafter he may eat betel, but not flesh or 
fish. They have great honour among the Indians, and as I have 
already said, they suffer death for no cause whatsoever, their own 
headman gives them a mild chastisement. They marry once only 
in our manner, and only the eldest son marries, he is treated like 
the head of an entailed estate. The other brothers remain single 
all their lives. These Bramenes keep their wives well guarded, and 
greatly honoured, so that no other men may sleep with them; if any 
of them die, they do not marry again, but if a woman wrongs her 
husband she is slain by poison. The brothers who remain bachelors 
sleep with the Nayre women, they hold it to be a great honour, 
and as they are Bramenes no woman refuses herself to them, yet 
they may not sleep with any woman older than themselves. They 
dwell in their own houses and cities, and serve as clergy in the 
houses of worship, whither they go to pray at certain hours of the 
day, performing their rituals and idolatries. 

“Some of these Bramenes serve the Kings in every manner 
except in arms. No man may prepare any food for the King except 
a Bramene or his own kin; they also serve as couriers to other 
countries with letters, money or merchandise, passing wherever they 


151 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


152 


152 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

wish to go in safety, and none does them any ill, even when the 
Kings are at war. These Bramenes are learned in their idolatry, 
and possess many books thereof. The Kings hold them in high 
esteem. 

“I have already spoken many times of the Nayres, and yet I 
have not hitherto told you what manner of men they are. You 
are to know that in this land of Malbar there is another caste of 
people, called Nayres, and among them are noble men who have 
no other duty than to serve in war, and they always carry their 
arms whithersoever they go, some swords and shields, others bows 
and arrows, and yet others spears. They all live with the King, 
and the other great Lords; nevertheless all receive stipends from 
the King or from the great Lords with whom they dwell. None 
may become a Nayre, save only he who is of Nayre lineage. They 
are very free from stain in their nobility. They will not touch any 
one of low caste, nor eat, nor drink save in the house of a Nayre. 

“These men are not married, their nephews (sisters’ sons) are 
their heirs. The Nayre women of good birth are very independent, 
and dispose of themselves as they please with Bramenes and 
Nayres, but they do not sleep with men of caste lower than their 
own under pain of death. When they reach the age of twelve years 
their mothers hold a great ceremony. When a mother perceives 
that her daughter has attained that age, she asks her kinsfolk 
and friends to make ready to honour her daughter, then she asks 
of the kindred and especially of one particular kinsman or great 
friend to marry her daughter; this he willingly promises and then 
he has a small jewel made, which would contain a half ducat of 
gold, long like a ribbon, with a hole through the middle which 
comes out on the other side, string on thread of white silk. The 
mother then on a fixed day is present with her daughter gaily 
decked with many rich jewels, making great rejoicings with music 
and singing, and a great assembly of people. Then the Kinsman 
or friend comes bringing that jewel, and going through certain 
forms, throws it over the girl’s neck. She wears it as a token 
all the rest of her life, and may then dispose of herself as she 
will. The man departs without sleeping with her inasmuch as he 
is her kinsman; if he is not, he may sleep with her, but is not 
obliged to do so. Thenceforward the mother goes about searching 
and asking some young man to take her daughter’s virginity; 
they must be Nayres and they regard it among themselves as a 
disgrace and a foul thing to take a woman’s virginity. And when 
any one has once slept with her, she is fit for association with 
men. Then the mother again goes about enquiring among other 
young Nayres if they wish to support her daughter, and take her as 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


153 


THE HOUSE THE HINDUS HAVE BUILT 

a Mistress so that three or four Nayres agree with her to keep 
her, and sleep with her, each paying her so much a day; the more 
lovers she has the greater is her honour. Each one of them passes 
a day with her from midday on one day, till midday on the next 
day and so they continue living quietly without any disturbance 
nor quarrels among them. If any of them wishes to leave her, he 
leaves her, and takes another, and she also if she is weary of a 
man, she tells him to go, and he does so, or makes terms with 
her. Any children they may have stay with the mother who has to 
bring them up, for they hold them not to be the children of any 
man, even if they bear his likeness, and they do not consider them 
their children, nor are they heirs to their estates, for as I have 
already stated their heirs are their nephews, sons of their sisters, 
(which rule whosoever will consider inwardly in his mind will find 
that it was established with a greater and deeper meaning than 
the common folk think) for they say that the Kings of the Nayres 
instituted it in order that the Nayres should not be held back 
from their service by the burden and labour of rearing children. 

“In this Kingdom of Malabar there is also another caste of 
people whom they call Biabares, Indian Merchants, natives of 
the land. They were there ere foreign nations had sailed to India. 
They deal in goods of every kind both in the seaports and inland, 
wheresoever their trade is of most profit. They gather to themselves 
all the pepper and ginger from the Nayres and husbandmen, 
and ofttimes they buy the new crops beforehand in exchange for 
cotton clothes and other goods which they keep at the seaports. 
Afterwards they sell them again and gain much money thereby. 
Their privileges are such that the King of the country in which 
they dwell cannot execute them by legal process. 

“There is in this land yet another caste of folk known as 
Cuiavem. They do not differ from the Nayres, yet by reason of a 
fault which they committed, they remain separate from them. Their 
business is to make pottery and bricks for roofing the houses of 
the Kings and idols, which are roofed with bricks instead of tiles; 
only these, for as I have already said, other houses are thatched 
with branches. They have their own sort of idolatry, and their 
separate idols. 

“There is another Heathen caste which they call Mainatos, 
whose occupation is to wash clothes for the Kings, Bramenes and 
Nayres. By this they live, and may not take up any other. 

“There is another lower caste than these which they call Caletis, 
who are weavers who have no other way of earning save by weaving 


153 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


154 


154 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of cotton and silk cloths, but they are low caste folk and have but 
little money, so that they clothe the lower races. They are apart by 
themselves and have their own idolatry. 

“Besides the castes mentioned above, there are eleven others 
lower than they within whom the others do not associate, nor do 
they touch them under pain of death; and there are great distinctions 
between one and another of them, preserving them from mixture 
with one another. The purest of all these low, simple folk they call 
Tuias. Their work is mainly that of tending the palm-groves, and 
gathering the fruit thereof, and carrying it away for wages on their 
backs, for there are no beasts of burden in the land. 

“There is another caste still lower than these whom they call 
Manen (Mancu in the printed text) who neither associate with others 
nor touch them, nor do the others touch them. They are washermen 
for the common people, and makers of sleeping mats, from which 
occupations all but they are barred; their sons must perforce follow 
the same trade; they have their own separate idolatry. 

“There is another caste in this land still lower whom they call 
Canaqus. Their trade is making buckles and umbrellas. They learn 
letters for purposes of astronomy, they are great astrologers, and 
foretell with great truth things that are to come; there are some 
lords who maintain them for this cause. 

“There is also another lower caste, also Heathens, called Ageres. 
They are masons, carpenters, smiths, metal workers and some are 
goldsmiths, all of whom are of a common descent, and a separate 
caste, and have their idols apart from other folk. They marry, and 
their sons inherit their property, and learn their fathers’ trade. 

“There is another caste still lower in this country called Mogeres, 
they are almost the same as the Tuias, but they do not touch one 
another. They work as carriers of things belonging to the Royal 
State when it moves from one place to another, but there are very 
few of them in this land; they are a separate caste; they have no 
marriage law; the most of them gain their living on the sea, they 
are sailors, and some of them fishers; they have no idols. They are 
as well slaves of the Nayres. 

“There is another caste yet lower whom they call Monquer, 
fishers who have no other work than fishing, yet some sail in the 
Moors’ ships and in those of other heathens, and they are very 
expert seamen. This race is very rude. They are shameless thieves; 
they marry and their sons succeed them, their women are of loose 
character, they sleep with any one-soever, and it is held no evil. 
They have thier own idolatry. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


155 


THE HOUSE THE HINDUS HAVE BUILT 

“In this land of Malabar there is another caste of Heathen even 
lower than these, whom they call Betunes. Their business is salt 
making and rice growing, they have no other livelihood. 

“They dwell in houses standing by themselves in the fields 
away from the roads, whither the gentlefolk do not walk. They 
have their own idolatry. They are slaves of the Kings and Nayres 
and pass their lives in poverty. The Nayres make them walk far 
away from them and speak to them from afar off. They hold no 
intercourse with any other caste. 

“There is another caste of Heathen, even lower and ruder, 
whom they call Paneens, who are great sorcerers, and live by no 
other means. 

“There is another caste lower and ruder than they, named 
Revoleens, a very poor folk, who live by carrying firewood and 
grass to the towns, they may touch none, nor may any touch them 
under pain of death. They go naked, covering only their private 
parts with scant and filthy rags, the more part of them indeed 
with leaves of certain trees. Their women wear many brass rings 
in their ears; and on their necks, arms and legs necklaces and 
bracelets of heads. 

“And there is yet another caste of Heathens lower than these 
whom they call Poleas, who among all the rest are held to be 
accursed and excommunicate; they dwell in the fields and open 
campaigns in secret lurking places, whither folk of good caste never 
go save by mischance, and live in huts very strait and mean. They 
are tillers of rice with buffaloes and oxen. They never speak to the 
Nayres save from off, shouting so that they may hear them, and 
when they go along the roads they utter loud cries, that they may 
be let past, and whosoever hears them leaves the road, and stands 
in the wood till they have passed by: and if any one, whether man 
or woman, touches them his kinsfolk slay them forthwith, and in 
vengeance therefore they slay Poleas until they are weary without 
suffering any punishment. 

“Yet another caste there is even lower and baser called Pareens, 
who dwell in the most desert places away from all other castes. 
They have no intercourse with any person nor any one with them 
they are held to be worse than devils, and to be damned. Even to 
see them is to be unclean and out-caste. They eat yams and other 
roots of wild plants. They cover their middles with leaves, they 
also eat the flesh of wild beasts. 

“With these end the distinctions between the castes of the 
Heathen, which are eighteen in all, each one separate and unable to 


155 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


156 


156 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

touch others or marry with them; and besides these eighteen 
castes of the Heathen who are natives of Malabar, which I have 
now related to you, there are others of outlandish folk, merchants 
and traders in the land, where they possess houses and estates, 
living like the natives, yet with customs of their own.” 

These foreigners were not able to give a full and detailed picture 
of caste. This is understandable. For to every foreigner the private life 
of the Hindu is veiled and it is not possible for him to penetrate it. 
The social organism of India, the play of its motive forces, is moreover, 
regulated infinitely more by custom, varying according to locality and 
baffling in its complexity, than by any legal formula which can be 
picked out of a legal text book. But there is no doubt that caste did 
appear to the foreigners as the most singular and therefore the most 
distinguishing feature of Hindu Society. Otherwise they would not 
have noted its existence in the record they made of what they observed 
when they came to India. 

Caste therefore is something special in the Hindu Social organization 
and marks off the Hindus from other peoples. Caste has been a growing 
institution. It has never been the same at all time. The shape and form 
of caste as it existed when Magasthenes wrote his account was very 
different from what the shape and form it has taken when Alberuni 
came and the appearance it gave to the Portuguese was different 
from what it was in the time of Alberuni. But to understand caste 
one must have more exact idea of its nature than these foreigners 
are able to give. 

To follow the discussion of the subject of caste it is necessary to 
familiarize the readers with some basic conceptions which underlie the 
Hindu Social organization. The basic conception of social organization 
which prevails among the Hindus starts with the rise of our classes or 
varnas into which Hindu society is believed to have become divided. 
These four classes were named: (1) Brahmins, the priestly and 
the educated class, (2) The Kshatriyas, the Military Class, (3) The 
Vaishyas, the trading class and, (4) The Shudras, the servant class. 
For a time these were merely classes. After a time what were only 
Classes (Varnas) became Castes (Jatis) and the four castes became 
four thousand. In this way the modern Caste System was only the 
evolution of the ancient Varna System. 

No doubt the caste system is an evolution of the Varna System. 
But one can get no idea of the caste system by a study of the Varna 
System. Caste must be studied apart from Varna. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


157 


THE HOUSE THE HINDUS HAVE BUILT 157 

2 

An old agnostic is said to have summed up his philosophy in the 
following words: 

“The only thing I know is that I know nothing; and I am not 

quite sure that I know that” 

Sir Denzil Ibbetson undertaking to write about caste in the Punjab 
said that the words of these agnostic about his philosophy expressed very 
exactly his own feelings regarding caste. It is no doubt true that owing 
to local circumstances there does appear a certain diversity about caste 
matters and that it is very difficult to make any statement regarding 
any one of the castes absolutely true as it may be as regards one locality 
which will not be contradicted with equal truth as regards the same 
caste in some other area. 

Although this may be true yet it cannot be difficult to separate 
the essential and fundamental features of caste from its non-essential 
superficial features. For easy approach to this to ascertain by asking 
what are the matters for which a person is liable to be excluded from 
caste. Mr. Bhattacharya has stated the following as causes for expulsion 
from caste: (1) Embracing Christianity or Islam, (2) Going to Europe or 
America, (3) Marrying a widow, (4) Publicly throwing the sacred thread, 
(5) Publicly eating beef, pork or foul, (6) Publicly eating Kaccha food 
prepared by a Mahomedan, Christian or low caste Hindu, (7) Officiating 
at the house of a very low caste Sudra, (8) By a female going away from 
home for immoral purposes and (9) By a widow becoming pregnant. This 
list is not exhaustive and omits the two most important causes which 
entail expulsion from caste. They are (10) intermarrying outside caste, 
(11) Interdining with persons of another caste, (12) Change of occupation. 
The second defect in the statement of Mr. Bhattacharya is that it does 
not make any distinction between essentials and (un)*essentials. Of course 
when a person is expelled from his caste the penalty is uniform. His 
friends, relatives, and fellow men refuse to partake of his hospitality. He 
is not invited to entertainments in their houses. He cannot obtain brides 
or bridegrooms for his children. Even his married daughters cannot visit 
him without running the risk of being excluded from caste. His priest, 
his barber and washerman refuse to serve him. His fellow castemen 
sever their connection with him so completely that they refuse to assist 
him even at the funeral of a member of his household. In some cases 
the man excluded from caste is debarred access to public temples and 
to the cremation or burial ground. 

* The original word in the MS was ‘essentials’. The editors felt it to be ‘unessentials’ 
and therefore corrected it accordingly. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


158 


158 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

These reasons for expulsion from caste indirectly show the rules and 
regulations of the caste. But all regulations are not fundamental. There 
are many which are unessential. Caste can exist even without them. 
The essential and unessential can be distinguished by asking another 
question. When can a Hindu who has lost caste regain his caste. The 
Hindus have a system of Prayaschitas which are penances and which 
a man who has been expelled from caste must perform before he can 
be admitted to caste fellowship. With regard to these Prayaschitas or 
Penances certain points must be remembered. In the first place there 
are caste offences for which there is no Prayaschita. In the second 
place the Prayaschitas vary according to the offence. In some cases the 
Prayaschita involves a very small penalty. In other cases the penalty 
involved is a very severe one. 

The existing of a Prayaschita and its absence have a significance which 
must be clearly understood. The absence of Prayaschita does not mean 
that any one may commit the offence with impunity. On the contrary it 
means that the offence is of an immeasurable magnitude and the offender 
once expelled is beyond reclamation. There is no reentry for him in the 
caste from which he is expelled. The existence of a Prayaschita means 
that the offence is compoundable. The offender can take the prescribed 
Prayaschita and obtain admission in the caste from which he is expelled. 

There are two offences for which there is no penance. These are (1) 
change from Hindu Religion to another religion, (2) Marriage with a 
person of another caste or another religion. It is obvious if a man loses, 
caste for these offences he loses it permanently. 

Of the other offences the Prayaschitas prescribed are of the severest 
kind are two: (1) Interdining with a person of another caste or a non- 
Hindu and (2) Taking to occupations which is not the occupation of the 
caste. In the case of the other offences the penalty is a light one almost 
nominal. 

The surest clue to find out what are the fundamental rules of caste and 
what caste consists in is furnished by the rules regarding Prayaschitas. 
Those for the infringement of which there is no Prayaschita constitute 
the very soul of caste and those for the infringement of which the 
Prayaschita is of the severest kind make up the body of caste. It may 
therefore be said without any hesitation that there are four fundamental 
rules of caste. A caste may be defined as a social group having (a) belief 
in Hindu Religion and bound by certain regulations as to, (b) marriage, 
(c) food and (d) occupation. To this one more characteristic may be added 
namely a social group having a common name by which it is recognized. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


159 


THE HOUSE THE HINDUS HAVE BUILT 159 

In the matter of marriage the regulation lays down that the caste 
must be endogamous. There can be no intermarriage between members 
of different castes. This is the first and the most fundamental idea on 
which the whole fabric of the caste is built up. 

In the matter of food the rule is that a person cannot take food from 
and dine with any person who does not belong to his caste. This means 
that only those who can intermarry can also interdine. Those who cannot 
intermarry cannot interdine. In other words caste is an endogamous unit 
and also a communal unit. 

In the matter of occupation the regulation is that a person must 
follow the occupation which is the traditional occupation of his caste 
and if the caste has no occupation then he should follow the occupation 
of his father. 

In the matter of status of a person it is fixed and is hereditary. It 
is fixed because a person’s status is determined by the status of the 
caste to which he belongs. It is hereditary because a Hindu is stamped 
with the caste to which his parents belonged, a Hindu cannot change 
his status because he cannot change his caste. A Hindu is born in a 
caste and he dies a member of the caste in which he is born. A Hindu 
may lose his status if he loses caste. But he cannot acquire a new or a 
better or different status. 

What is the significance of a common name for a caste? The significance 
of this will be clear if we ask two questions which are very relevant 
and a correct answer to each is necessary for a complete idea of this 
institution of caste. Social groups are either organized or unorganized. 
When the membership of the group and the process of joining and leaving 
the groups, are the subject of definite social regulations and involve 
certain duties and privileges in relation to other members of the group 
then the group is an organized group. A group is a voluntary group 
in which members enter with a full knowledge of what they are doing 
and the aims which the association is designed to fulfil. On the other 
hand there are groups of which an individual person becomes a member 
without any act of volition, and becomes subject to social regulation and 
traditions over which he has no control of any kind. 

Now it is hardly necessary to say that caste is a highly organized 
social grouping. It is not a loose or a floating body. Similarly it is not 
necessary to say that caste is an involuntary grouping. A Hindu is born 
in a caste and he dies as a member of that caste. There is no Hindu 
without caste, cannot escape caste and being bounded by caste from 
birth to death he becomes subject to social regulations and traditions 
of the caste over which he has no control. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


160 


160 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The significance of a separate name for a caste lies in this — namely 
it makes caste an organized and an involuntary grouping. A separate and 
a distinctive name for a caste makes caste asking to a corporation with 
a perpetual existence and a seal of separate entity. The significance of 
separate names for separate castes has not been sufficiently realized by 
writers on caste. In doing that they have lost sight of a most distinctive 
feature of caste social groups there are and there are bound to be in 
every society. Many social groups in many countries can be equated 
to various castes in India and may be regarded as their equivalent. 
Potters, Washermen, Intellectuals as social groups are every where. But 
in other countries they have remained as unorganized and voluntary 
groups while in India they have become organized and involuntary i.e. 
they have become castes is because in other countries the social groups 
were not given name while in India they did. It is the name which the 
caste bears which gives it fixity and continuity and individuality. It 
is the name which defines who are its members and in most cases a 
person born in a caste carries the name of the caste as a part of his 
surname. Again it is the name which makes it easy for the caste to 
enforce its rules and regulations. It makes it easy in two ways. In the 
first place, the name of the caste forming a surname of the individual 
prevents the offender in passing off as a person belonging to another 
caste and thus escape the jurisdiction of the caste. Secondly, it helps to 
identify the offending individual and the caste to whose jurisdiction he 
is subject so that he is easily handed up and punished for any breach 
of the caste rules. 

This is what caste means. Now as to the caste system. This involves 
the study of the mutual relations between different castes. Looked at as 
a collection of caste the caste system presents several features which at 
once strike the observer. In the first place there is no inter-connection 
between the various castes which form a system. Each caste is separate 
and distinct. It is independent and sovereign in the disposal of its 
internal affairs and the endorcement of caste Regulations. The castes 
touch but they do not interpenetrate. The second feature relates to the 
order in which one caste stands in relation to the other castes in the 
system. That order is vertical and not horizontal. 

In other words castes are not equal in status. Their order is based 
on inequality. One caste is higher or lower in relation to another. Castes 
form an hierarchy in which one caste is at the top and is the highest, 
another at the bottom and it is the lowest and in between there are 
castes every one of which is at once above some caste and below some 
caste. The caste system is a system of gradation in which every caste 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


161 


THE HOUSE THE HINDUS HAVE BUILT 161 

except the highest and the lowest has a priority and precedence over 
some other caste. 

How is this precedence or this superiority determined? This order 
of superiority and inferiority or this insubordination is determined by 
Rules (1) which are connected with religious rites and (2) which are 
connected with commensality. 

Religion as a basis of Rules of precedence manifests itself in three 
ways. Firstly through religious ceremonies, secondly through incantations 
that accompany the religious ceremonies and thirdly through the position 
of the priest. 

Beginning with the ceremonies as a source of rules of precedence it 
should be noted that the Hindu Scriptures prescribe sixteen religious 
ceremonies. Although those are Hindu ceremonies every Hindu Caste 
cannot by right claim to perform all the sixteen ceremonies. Few can 
claim the right to perform all. Some are allowed to perform certain 
ceremonies, some are not allowed to perform certain of the ceremonies. 
For instance take the ceremony of Upanayan, wearing the sacred thread. 
Some castes can’t. Precedence follows this distinction in the matters of 
right to perform the ceremonies. A caste which can claim to perform all 
the ceremonies is higher in status than the caste which has a right to 
perform a few. 

Turning to the Mantras it is another source for rules of precedence. 
According to the Hindu Religion the same ceremony can be performed in 
three different ways: (1) Vedokta, (2) Shastrokta and (3) Puranokta. In 
the Vedokta form the ceremony is performed with Mantras (incantations) 
from the Vedas. In the Shastrokta form the ceremony is performed with 
Mantras (incantations) from the Shastras. In the Puranokta form the 
ceremony is performed with Mantras (incantations) from the Puranas. 
Hindu Religious Scriptures fall into three distinct categories: (1) The 
Vedas which are four, (2) The Shastras which are six and (3) The Puranas 
which are eighteen. Although they are all respected as scriptures they 
do not all have the same sanctity. The Vedas have the highest sanctity. 
The Shastras stand next in order of sanctity and the Puranas have the 
lowest sanctity. The way the Mantras give rise to social precedence will 
be obvious if it is borne in mind that not every caste is entitled to have 
the ceremony performed in the Vedokta form. Three castes may well 
claim the right to the performance of one of the sixteen ceremonies. But 
it well be that one of it is entitled to perform it in the Vedokta form, 
another in the Shastrokta form and the third only in the Puranokta form. 
Precedence goes with the kind of Mantra that a caste is entitled to use in 
the performance of a religious ceremony. A caste which is entitled to use 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


162 


162 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Vedic Mantra is superior to a caste which is entitled to use Shastrik 
Mantra and a caste which is entitled to use Shastrik Mantras is higher 
than a caste which is entitled to use only Puranokta Mantras. 

Taking the priest as third source of precedence connected with Religion 
Hinduism requires the instrumentality of a priest for the derivation 
of the full benefit from the performance of a religious ceremony. The 
priest appointed by the scriptures is the Brahmin. A Brahmin therefore 
is indispensible. But the scriptures do not require that a Brahmin shall 
accept the invitation of any and every Hindu irrespective of his caste 
to officiate at a religious ceremony. The invitation of which caste he 
will accept and of which he will refuse is a matter left to the wishes of 
the Brahmin. By long and well established custom it is now settled at 
which caste he will officiate and at which caste he will not. This fact has 
become the basis of precedence as between castes. The caste at which a 
Brahmin will officiate is held as superior to a caste at whose religious 
functions a Brahmin will not officiate. 

The second source for rules of precedence is commensality. It will be 
noticed that rules of marriage have not given rise to rules of precedence 
as rules of commensality have. The reason lies in the distinction between 
the rules prohibiting intermarriage and interdining. That difference is 
obvious. The prohibition on intermarriage is such that it can not only be 
respected but it can be carried out quite strictly. But the prohibition of 
interdining creates difficulties. It cannot be carried out quite strictly in 
all places and under all circumstances. Man migrates and must migrate 
from place to place. In every place he happens to go he may not find his 
castemen. He may find himself landed in the midst of strangers. Marriage 
is not a matter of urgency but food is. He can wait for getting himself 
married till he returns to the society of his castemen. But he cannot wait 
for his food. He must find it from somewhere and from someone. Question 
arises from which caste he can take food if he has to. The rule is that 
he will take food from a caste above his but will not take food from a 
caste which is below his. There is no way of finding how it came to be 
decided that a Hindu can take food from one caste and not from another. 
By long series of precedent every Hindu knows from what caste he can 
take food and from what caste he cannot. This is determined chiefly by 
the rule followed by the Brahmin. A caste is higher or lower according 
as the Brahmin takes from it food or not. In this connection the Brahmin 
has a very elaborate set of rules in the matter of food and water. (1) 
He will take only water from some and not from others. (2) A Brahmin 
will not take food cooked in water by any caste. (3) He will take only 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


163 


THE HOUSE THE HINDUS HAVE BUILT 163 

food cooked in oil from some castes. Again he has as a set of rules in 
the matter of the vessel, in which he will accept food and water. He 
will take food or water in an earthen vessel from some caste, only in 
metallic vessel from some and only in glass vessel from others. This 
goes to determine the level of the caste. If he takes food cooked in oil 
from a caste its status is higher than the caste from which he will not. 
If he takes water from a caste it is higher than the caste from which 
he will not. If he takes water in a metallic vessel that caste is higher 
than the caste from which he will take water in an earthen vessel and 
the caste from which he will take water in an earthen vessel is higher 
than the caste from which he will take water in a glass vessel. Glass is 
a substance which is called Nirlep (which conserves no stain) therefore 
a Brahmin can take water in it even from the lowest. But other metals 
do conserve stains. Contaminating character of the stain depends upon 
the status of the person who has used it. That status depends upon the 
Brahmin’s will to accept water in that vessel. 

These are some of the factors which determine the place and status 
of a caste in this Hindu hierarchial system of castes. 

Such is caste and such is caste system. Question is, is this enough 
to know the Hindu Social Organization. For a static conception of the 
Hindu Social Organization an idea of the caste and the caste system 
is enough. One need not trouble to remember more than the facts that 
the Hindus are divided into castes and that the castes form a system 
in which all hang on a thread which runs through the system in such 
a way that while encircling and separating one caste from another it 
holds them all as though as it was a string of tennis balls hanging one 
above the other. But this will not be enough to understand caste as a 
dynamic phenomenon. To follow the workings of caste in action it is 
necessary to note one other feature of caste besides the caste system, 
namely class-caste system. 

The relationship between the ideas of caste and class has been a 
matter of lively controversy. Some say that caste is analogous to class. 
Others hold that the idea of caste is analogous to class and that there 
is no difference between the two. Others hold that the idea of caste is 
fundamentally opposed to that of class. This is an aspect of the subject 
of caste about which more will be said hereafter. For the present it is 
necessary to emphasize one feature of the caste system which has not 
been referred to hereinbefore. It is this. Although caste is different from 
and opposed to the notion of class yet the caste-system as distinguished 
from caste — recognizes a class system which is somewhat different 
from the graded status referred to above. Just as the Hindus are 
divided into so many castes, castes are divided into different classes 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


164 


164 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of castes. The Hindu is caste conscious. He is also class conscious. 
Whether he is caste conscious or class conscious depends upon the 
caste with which he comes in conflict. If the caste with which he comes 
in conflict is a caste within the class to which he belongs he is caste 
conscious. If the caste is outside the class to which he belongs he is class 
conscious. Any one who needs any evidence on this point may study the 
Non-Brahmin Movement in the Madras and Bombay Presidency. Such a 
study will leave no doubt that to a Hindu caste periphery is as real as 
class periphery and caste consciousness is as real as class consciousness. 

Caste, it is said, is an evolution of the Varna System. I will show 
later on that this is nonsense. Caste is a perversion of Varna, at any 
rate it is an evolution in the opposite direction. But while Caste has 
completely perverted the Varna System it has borrowed the class system 
from the Varna System. Indeed the Class-Caste System follows closely 
the class cleavages of the Varna System. 

Looking at the caste system from this point of view one comes across 
several lines of class cleavage which run through this pyramid of castes 
dividing the pyramid into blocks of castes. The first line of cleavage follows 
the line of division noticeable in the ancient Chaturvarna system. The old 
system of Chaturvarna made a distinction between the first three Varnas, 
the Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, and the forth Varna namely the 
Shudras. The three former were classes as the Regenerate classes. The 
Shudra was held as the unregenerate class: This distinction was based 
upon the fact that the former were entitled to wear the sacred thread 
and study the Vedas. The Shudra was entitled to neither and that is 
why he was regarded as the unregenerate class. This line of cleavage is 
still in existence and forms the basis of the present day class division 
separating the castes which have grown out of the vast class of Shudras 
from those which have grown out of the three classes of Brahmins, the 
Kashatriyas and Vaishyas. This line of class cleavage is the one which 
is expressed by the terms High Castes and Low Castes and which are 
short forms for High Class Castes and Low Class Castes. 

Next after this line of cleavage there runs through the pyramid a 
second line of class cleavage. It runs just below the Low Class Castes. 
It sets above all the castes born out of the four Varnas i.e. The High 
Castes as well as the Low Castes above the remaining Castes which 
I will merely describe as the ‘rest’, This line of class cleavage is 
again a real one and follows the well defined distinction which was a 
fundamental principle of the Chaturvarna System. The Chaturvarna 
System as is pointed out made a distinction between the four Varnas 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


165 


THE HOUSE THE HINDUS HAVE BUILT 165 

putting the three Varnas above the fourth. But it also made an equally 
clear distinction between those within the Chaturvarna and those 
outside the Chaturvarna. It had a terminology to express this distinction. 
Those within the Chaturvarna — high or low, Brahmins or Shudras were 
called Savarna i.e. those with the stamp of the Varna. Those outside 
the Chaturvarna were called Avarna i.e. those without the stamp of 
Varna. All the Castes which have evolved out of the four Varnas are 
called Savarna Hindus — which is rendered in English by the term caste 
Hindus. The ‘rest’ are the Avarnas who in present parlance spoken of 
by Europeans as Non-Caste Hindus i.e. those who are outside the 4 
original castes or Varnas. 

Much that is written about the Caste System has reference mostly 
to the Caste-System, among the Savarna Hindus. Very little is known 
about the Avarna Hindus. Who are these Avarna Hindus, what is their 
position in Hindu Society, how are they related to the Savarna Hindus, 
are questions to which no attention has so far been paid. I am sure that 
without considering these questions no one can get a true picture of the 
social structure the Hindus have built. To leave out the Class cleavage 
between the Savarna Hindus and the Avarna Hindus is to relate Grimm’s 
Fairy Tale which leaves out the witches, the goblins and the ogres. 

The Avarna Hindus comprise three divisions (1) Primitive Castes, 
(2) Criminal Castes and (3) The Untouchable Castes. The total population 
of persons comprising these three classes is by no means small. The 
population of the Primitive Tribes in India according to the Census of 
1931 is stated to be about 25 millions. The total population of persons 
listed as Criminal is somewhere about 454 millions. The total population 
of Untouchables in 1931 was about 50 millions. The grand total of these 
three comes to 7914 millions. 

What is the relation of the Savarna Castes to the Avarna Castes? 
The cleavage between the Savarna Castes and the Avarna Castes 
is not uniform in its consequences with the result that the position 
created is not easy to grasp. The line of the cleavage running between 
the Savarna Castes and the Avarna Castes produces a relationship 
between the Savarna Castes and the two Avarna Castes — the Primitive 
and the Criminal Castes which is different from the relationship which 
it produces between the Savarna Castes and the last of the Avarna 
Castes namely the Untouchables. This line of cleavage between the 
Savarna Castes and the first two of the Avarna Castes is a cleavage 
between kindred and friends. It does not make intercourse on 
respectful terms between the two impossible. The cleavage between 
the Savarna Castes and the Untouchables is of a different kind. It is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


166 


166 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a cleavage between two non-kindred and hostile groups. There is no 
possibility of friendly intercourse on respectable terms. 

What is the significance of this line of cleavage? On what is it based? 
Although the cleavage is definite the basis of it has not been defined. 
But it seems that the basis of cleavage is the same as that which exists 
between the Dwijas and the Shudras. Like the Shudras the Avarna 
Castes are composed of unregenerate people. They are not twice born 
and have no right to wear the sacred thread. This also brings out two 
facts which otherwise are lost sight of. The first fact is that the difference 
between the Shudra Castes of the Savarna division of castes and the 
Primitive and the Criminal Castes of the Avarna division is very thin. 
Both are touchables and both are unregenerate. The difference is one of 
cultural development. But although the cultural difference between the 
two sections is great — as great as there is between a highly cultured 
and the unmitigated barbarian — from the point of view of the orthodox 
Hindu, the difference between them is one of degree. It is to mark this 
difference in culture that the Hindus invented a new terminology which 
recognized two classes of Shudras, (1) Sat-Shudras and (2) Shudras. 
Calling the old body of Shudras as Sat Shudras or cultured Shudras and 
using the term Shudras to those comprizing the Primitive Castes who 
had come within the pale of Hindu Civilization. The new terminology 
did not mean any difference in the rights and duties of Shudras. The 
distinction pointed out those Shudras who were fit for associated life 
with the Dwijas and those who were less fitted for it. 

What is the relation of Avarna Castes to one another? Do they exist 
as mere collection of castes or have they any class cleavages ? They are 
certainly mere collection of Castes. There are certainly lines of class 
clevages running through this block of Avarna Castes. Whether there 
is a line of class clevage running between the Primitive Castes and the 
Criminal Castes may be a matter of some doubt. Perhaps the line is 
faint. But there is no doubt that there is a very definite a very broad 
and a very emphatic line of clevage between the Primitive Castes and 
the Criminal Castes and the Untouchables. The former two have a very 
clear notion that they are the higher classes and the Untouchables are 
the lower classes within this block of Avarna Castes. 

The discussion carried on so far reveals three characteristic features 
of Hindu Social Organization: (1) Caste, (2) A hierarchial System 
of Castes and (3) A Class System cutting into the Caste System. 
Undoubtedly the structure is a very complicated one and it is perhaps 
difficult for one who has not been woven into it to form a true mental 
picture of the same. Perhaps a diagramatic presentation may be 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


167 


THE HOUSE THE HINDUS HAVE BUILT 167 

helpful. I give below one such representation which in my judgment is 
calculated to give the idea of this social structure of the Hindus. 


A Caste Hindus 
Savarna Castes 

C Caste Hindus 
Savarna Castes 

E Non-Caste Hindus 
Avarna Castes 

G Non-caste 
Hindus 

Class I 

Class II 

Class III 

Class IV 

High Castes 

Low Caste 

Primitive Castes 

Untouchables 

Dwijas — Castes 
evolved out of 
the three 
Varna s, 
Brahmins, 
Kshatriyas and 
Vaishas. 

Shudras — 
Castes evolved 
out of the 4th 
Varna namely 
Shudras. 

Criminal Castes 


B 

D 

F 

H 


This diagram is left blank in the MS. — Ed. 


This diagram presents a Class-Caste-System of the Hindus and 
is so drawn as to give a true and a complete picture of their social 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


168 


168 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

organization. This diagram brings out several of its important features. 
It shows that there are two divisions of Hindus (I) Savarna Hindus and 
(II) Avarna Hindus. It shows that within the first division there are two 
classes of Castes (I) Dwijas and (2) Shudras and within the second division 
there are two Classes of castes (1) Primitive and Criminal Castes and 
(2) The Untouchable Castes. The next thing to note is that each caste 
is enclosed and separated from the rest — a fact which is not shown in 
the diagram — each of the four classes of Castes is grouped together and 
placed within a class enclosure. This enclosure segregates a class of a 
Caste and marks it off from another class. A class of Castes is not as 
organized as a Caste is. But a feeling of Class is there. The third thing 
to note is the nature of partitions used for the enclosures. They are of 
various strengths, some are permanent, some are temporary. The partition 
between the Dwijas Castes and the Shudras Castes is not a partition 
at all. It is only a curtain. It is not a partition at all. It is intended to 
keep them aloof. It is not intended to cut them as under. The line of 
cleavage between the Shudra Castes and the first two of the Avarna 
Castes is a regular partition. But it is both thin and small. It can be 
jumped over. The partition separates but does not cause severance. But 
the partition between these three classes and the Untouchables is a real 
and irremovable partition. It is a barbed wire fence and its intention is 
to mark a severance. To express the same thing in a different way the 
first three enclosures are so placed that they are one within the other. 
The first partition between the Dwijas and the Shudra Castes may be 
removed the two become the occupants of one enclosure instead of two 
separate enclosures. Similarly the second partition may be removed in 
which case the Castes which are Dwija, Shudra, Primitive and Criminal 
form one whole — if not a single whole — occupying one single enclosure. 
But the third partition can never be removed. Because all three Classes 
of Castes are united on one issue namely that they shall not be one ( This 
space is left blank in the typed copy of MS. The word ‘one’ is introduced 
by us. — Ed.) with the Untouchables as one united body of people. There is 
a bar sinister, which serves the Untouchables from the rest and compells 
them to be apart and outside. 

The diagram shows the different Classes of Castes one above 
the other. This is done to mark the hierarchy which is an important 
feature of the Caste System. I have described the two classes of the 
Savarna Castes as High Class Castes and Low Class Castes. But I 
have not described the other two classes of Avarna Castes as lower 
Class Castes and lowest Class Castes. In a sense this would have been 
correct. In general social esteem they are no doubt lower and lowest in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


169 


THE HOUSE THE HINDUS HAVE BUILT 169 

status. But in another sense this would not be appropriate. The 
terminology of high, low, lower and lowest assumes that they are parts 
of one whole. But are the Avarna Castes and the Savarna Castes parts 
of one whole? They were not. The Primitive and the Criminal Castes 
were not in contemplation when the plan of the Varna System, the 
parent of the present caste system, was laid. Consequently nothing is 
said about their status and position in the rules of the Varna System. 
But that is not the case with the Untouchables. They were within the 
contemplation of the Varna System and the Rule of the Varna System 
with regard to the Untouchables is very clear and very definite. The rule 
as laid down by Manu the Hindu Law giver is that there are only four 
Varnas and that there is not to be a fifth Varna. The reformers who are 
friends of Mr. Gandhi in his campaign for removal of Untouchability are 
endeavouring to give a new meaning to the statement of Manu. They 
say that Manu has been misunderstood. According to Manu there is no 
fifth Varna and therefore he intended to include the Untouchables into 
the 4th Varna namely the Shudras. But this is an obvious perversion. 
What Manu meant was there were originally four Varnas and four they 
must remain. He was not going to admit the Untouchables into the 
House the ancient Hindus had built by enlarging the Varna System to 
consist of five Varnas. That is what he meant when he said that there 
is not to be a fifth Varna. That he wanted the Untouchables to remain 
out of the Hindu social structure is clear from the name by which he 
describes the Untouchables. He speaks of them as Varna — Bahyas 
(those outside the Varna System). That is the diference between the 
Primitive and Criminal Castes and the Untouchables. There being no 
positive injunction against their admission in Hindu Society they may 
in course of time become members of it. At present they are linked to 
Hindu Society and hereafter they may become integrated into it and 
become part of it. But the case of the Untouchables is different. There 
is positive injunction against their incorporation in Hindu Society. There 
is no room for reform. They must remain separate and segregated 
without being a part of the Hindu Society. The Untouchables are not a 
part of the Hindu Society. And if they are a part they are a part but 
not of the whole. The idea showing the connection between the Hindus 
and the Untouchables was accurately expressed by Ainapure Shastri 
the leader of the orthodox Hindus at a Conference held in Bombay. He 
said that the Untouchables were related to the Hindus as a man is to 
his shoe. A man wears a shoe. In that sense it is attached to man and 
may be said to be a part of the man. But it is not part of the whole 
for two things that can be attached and detached can’t be said to form 
parts of one whole. The analogy though is none the less accurate. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


170 


Chapter 17 

THE ROCK ON WHICH IT IS BUILT 

Hindu Society is a house of Castes. Hindus are not a people. They 
are the aggregates of groups of people formed into castes. This is its 
peculiarity. This is what has struck the stream of foreigners who have 
visited India in the course of history. Notwithstanding this there are 
however people who endeavour to say that there is nothing peculiar 
about caste. For instance Prof. Baines remarks: 

“There is little in the system which is not to be found, or which 
has not at some time or other existed, in other countries, even of 
the West, though it has there been long ago worn away by other 
influences. The crystalization of certain bodies into definite orders 
or classes, for instance, is a common, almost a universal, trait and 
among them the tendency to become hereditary and as exclusive 
or aspiring as circumstances allow may almost be called natural”. 

The argument may be strengthened by reference to the social 
organization of Primitive peoples. In Primitive Society man is never 
found alone. 

The commonest and therefore the most natural condition of men 
is to live in groups. This social grouping has taken many forms in the 
course of history. The family is one such social group which is universal 
and which has survived. The group larger than the immediate family 
was the clan. In its lowest terms, the clan (which also called kin, 
sept or sib) was supposed to be a group of individuals related to one 
another either through the mother or through the father. Far distant 
cousins might be considered in the relationship, and were regarded as 
members of the group. Again, the relationship may be purely fictitious, 
but from the social point of view this was as real a bond as that made 
by common blood. The next larger division than the clan is a soical 
grouping of the clans. When the clans are organized into two groups 
each group is called a moiety. When it is organized in more than two 
groups each is called a phratry. This dual system was not by any means 
world-wide in distribution and the functions which the phratry or the 
moiety was intended to perform are not quite definitely known. But 
there is no doubt that each moiety and phratry was a social grouping 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


171 


THE ROCK ON WHICH IT IS BUILT 171 

in which there was a feeling of brotherhood between the members of 
clans associated together. The tribal groups come next. There were wide 
differences in the nature, character and structure of tribes. Tribes may be 
made up of village communities with no divisions into clans or moieties. 
They may have clans and no moieties, or moieties and no clans; or they 
may have both moieties and clans. Tribal consciousness was sometimes 
strong or some time weak. Although in the formation of tribal groups 
there was neither a definite rule nor a single line of evolution, there 
were certain common features present namely a common dialect, common 
customs, a more or less definite territory and some form of Government 
to which the whole tribe was present. Larger than the tribe was the 
confederacy or union of Tribes. But this was very uncommon. A loose 
and informal alliance to meet some specific danger may bring about 
a union of tribes. It is very seldom that a definite compact is found 
among the primitive peoples. The famous Iroquois confederacy is one 
of the exceptions. 

These are social groups based either upon the idea of kindred or on 
that of locality. There were groups among primitive peoples, where the 
cleavage is along other lines. These other lines of grouping took as its 
basis sex, age or some other criteria. As a form of social grouping there 
is nothing new or nothing peculiar in this institution of caste. A caste 
is like a clan and like the clan it is only a form of social grouping. 

The analogy between caste and clan may be admitted although it must 
be strongly insisted that as to meaning and purpose, caste is antagonistic 
to clan. There is no clan system comparable to the caste system. There 
is no gradation of clans as there is no Class- Clan System to match the 
Class-Caste System. Indeed the clan organization of the Primitive people 
is a complete antithesis of the caste organization of the Hindus. I admit 
the analogy only to drive my point. To my mind the question whether 
the institution of caste is natural or unnatural, peculiar or common is 
no doubt an interesting and instructive. But it is not as important as 
the question I want to raise. That question is why has caste endured, 
remained in tact when similar social groupings which were existing in 
other countries have vanished with the growth of civilization. 

The Romans had a Social organization very similar to the Hindus. 

When all similar institutions have vanished why has caste alone 
endured ? Why do people obey its rules, what is the sanction for Caste ? 

Obedience by men to rules of society is everywhere secured by means 
of four sanctions. They are (1) the natural, (2) popular, (3) legal and 
(4) religious. Which of these supports the caste system? But before going 
into that question it would be desirable to describe the manner each of 
these sanctions operates. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


172 


172 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The natural sanction operates through habit. When a person is 
habituated to act in a certain way nothing is required to force him to 
act in that way. He becomes an automation and the regularity of the 
act is guaranteed as a matter of routine. 

Popular sanction works through public opinion. It was the sense 
of approbation and disapprobation prevalent in Society in relation to 
certain ways and practices. A certain way becomes folkway and Acts 
in conformity with an established folkway, receives approbation and an 
Act contrary to it is regarded with disapprobation. 

There is nothing special either in the natural sanction or popular 
sanction. They are to be found everywhere and behind everything that 
is social in its import. Their native force is precarious and wherever it 
possesses more than its ordinary efficacy it is only when they are derived 
from either of the other two sanctions. Legal sanction and Religious 
sanction are the only two sanctions which are capable of sustaining any 
given institution. 

There is no doubt that caste had the sanction of Hindu Law. Every 
Hindu Law Book has recognized Caste as a legal institution — a breach of 
which was an offence and entailing punishment. The Law Book of Manu 
called Manav Dharma Shastra is the oldest and the most authoritative 
Law Book of the Hindus. It would be enough to quote from it texts 
showing that Caste was recognized by Law. 

Manu, the Hindu Law giver gives legal recognition to the institution 
of the four Varnas. To lay down the law of the four Varnas seems to 
be the principal object of Manu’s code. This is clear from the opening 
verses of the Code. They state that: 

1.1. The great sages approached Manu, who was seated with a 
collected mind, and, having duly worshipped him, spoke as follows: 

1.2. “Deign, divine one, to declare to us precisely and in due 
order the sacred laws of each of the (four chief) castes (varna) and 
of the intermediate ones.”. 

Not only he gives it his legal sanction, he makes it incumbent upon 
the King to uphold the institution: 

VII. 35. The king has been created (to be) the protector of the 
castes (varna) and orders, who, all according to their rank, discharge 
their several duties.”. 

VIII. 24. All castes (varna) would be corrupted (by intermixture), 
all barriers would be broken through, and all men would rage (against 
each other) in consequence of mistakes with respect to punishment.”. 

Manu makes breach of Caste a sin and prescribes three different 
punishments to one who has become a Patit by loss of caste. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


173 


THE ROCK ON WHICH IT IS BUILT 


173 


The first punishment is punishment after death. Manu says: 

“XII. 60. He who has associated with outcasts, he who has 
approached the wives of other men, and he who has stolen the 
property of a Brahmana becomes Brahmarakshasa.”. 

In this life the punishment which a Patit has to undergo was twofold. 
One was excommunication. The nature and character of excommunication 
prescribed by Manu has been prescribed by him in the following terms: 

“XI. 181. He who associates with an outcast, himself becomes 
an outcast after a year, not by sacrificing for him, teaching him, 
or forming a matrimonial alliance with him, but by using the same 
carriage or seat, or by eating with him. 

“XI. 182. He who associates with any one of those outcasts, 
must perform, in order to atone for (such) intercourse, the penance 
prescribed for that (sinner). 

“XI. 183. The Sapindas and Samanodakas of an outcast must 
offer (a libation of) water (to him, as if he were dead), outside (the 
village), on an inauspicious day, in the evening and in the presence 
of the relatives, officiating priests, and teachers. 

“XI. 184. A female slave shall upset with her foot a pot filled 
with water, as if it were for a dead person; (his Sapindas) as well 
as the Samanodakas shall be impure for a day and a night. 

“XI. 185. But thenceforward it shall be forbidden to converse with 
him, to sit with him, to give him a share of the inheritance, and to 
hold with him such intercourse as is usual among men.”. The other 
was disinheritance. 

“IX. 201. Eunuchs and outcasts, (persons) born blind or deaf, the 
insane, idiots and the dumb, as well as those deficient in any organ 
(of action or sensation), receive no share.”. 

“XI. 186. And (if he be the eldest) his right of primogeniture 
shall be withheld and the additional share, due to the eldest son, 
and in his stead a younger brother, excelling in virtue, shall obtain 
the share of the eldest.”. 

The only way to avoid these two punishments of excommunication 
and disinheritance was to do penance in the prescribed form. Penance 
was the only remedy. Says Manu: 

“XI. 187. But when he has performed his penance, they shall 
bathe with him in a holy pool and throw down a new pot, filled 
with water. 

“XI. 188. But he shall throw that pot into water, enter his house 
and perform, as before, all the duties incumbent on a relative”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


174 


174 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

There was a distinction between a male Path and a female Patit. 
Neither was exempt. The Rule applies to both, for Manu says: 

“XI. 189. Let him follow the same rule in the case of female 
outcast; but clothes, food, and drink shall be given to them, and 
they shall live close to the (family) house.”. 

There can be no doubt that the legal sanction was powerful sanction. 

The punishment prescribed by law for breach of Caste was two- 
fold. It involved excommunication and loss of right to inherit. How 
formidable these punishments were has been well described by Sir 
Thomas Strange in his treatise on Hindu Law. Referring to the subject 
he says: 

“It remains to consider one case, that may be said to be, with 
reference to personal delinquency, instar omnium — occurring in 
every enumeration on the subject as a cause of exclusion, namely: 
degradation, or the case of the outcaste. Accompanied with 
certain ceremonies, its effect is, to exclude him from all social 
intercourse, to suspend in him every civil function, to disqualify 
him for all the offices, and all the charities of life; — he is to be 
deserted by his connexions, who are from the moment of the 
sentence attaching upon him, to desist from speaking to him, 
from sitting in his company, from delivering to him any inherited, 
or other property, and from every civil or usual attention, as 
inviting him on the first day of the year, or the like, so that a 
man under these circumstances, might as well be dead; which, 
indeed, the Hindu Law considers him to be, directing libations to 
be offered to Manes, as though he were naturally so. This system 
of privations, mortifying as it must be, was enforced under the 
ancient law, by denouncing a similar fate to any one, by whose 
means they were endeavoured to be eluded; but this severity was 
moderated at the beginning of the present age, in which it is said 
“the sinner alone bears his guilt”, the law deeming so seriously of 
non-intercourse, that if one who ought to associate at meals with 
another, refuses to do so, without sufficient cause, he is punishable. 
And, in the Bombay reports, there is an instance of an action 
of damages, for a malicious expulsion from caste. The analogy 
between degradation by the Hindu law, and excommunication, 
as it prevailed formerly among us, holds, not merely in the 
general nature and effect of the proceeding, but in the peculiar 
circumstance of the one and the other being two-fold. As, with 
us, there was the less, and the greater excommunication, so, of 
offences considered with reference to their occasioning exclusion 
from inheritance among the Hindus, they may also be regarded in 
a two-fold point of view. This we learn from a case that was before 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


175 


THE ROCK ON WHICH IT IS BUILT 

the Sudder Dewanny Adawlut of Bengal, in 1814, in which the 
official Pundits, having been referred to, distinguished between 
“those which involve partial and temporary degradation, and 
those which are followed by loss of caste”, — observing that “in 
the former state, that of partial degradation, when the offence 
which occasions it is expiated, the impediment to succession is 
removed; but in the latter, where the degradation is complete, 
although the sinfulness of the offence may be removed by expiatory 
penance, yet the impediment to succession still remains, because 
a person finally excluded from his tribe must ever continue to 
be an outcaste.” In the case alluded to, the party in question 
having been guilty of a series of profligate and abandoned conduct, 
having been shamefully addicted to spirituous liquors, having 
been in the habit of associating and eating with persons of the 
lowest description, and most infamous character; having wantonly 
attacked and wounded several people at different times; having 
openly cohabited with a woman of the Mahomedan persuation; 
and having set fire to the dwelling house of his adoptive mother, 
whom he had more than once attempted to destroy by other 
means”, the Pundits declared that “of all the offences proved to 
have been committed by Sheannauth, one only, namely, that of 
cohabiting with a Mahomedan woman, was of such a nature, as to 
subject him to the penalty of expulsion from his tribe irrevocably,” 
and of this opinion was the Court. The power to degrade is, in 
the first instance, with the Castes themselves, assembled for the 
purpose, from whose sentence, if not acquiesced in, there lay an 
appeal to the King’s Courts. In the case that has been cited, the 
question arose incidentally, upon a claim of inheritance, and that 
case shews that the power amounts to a species of Censorship, 
applicable to the morals of the people, in instances to which 
the law, strictly speaking, would not perhaps otherwise extend. 
The sentences can be inflicted only for offences committed by 
the delinquent in his existing state; and, where the offence is 
of an inferior nature, to justify it, it must have been repeated. 
What distinguishes degradation from other causes of exclusion 
is, that it extends its effects to the son, who is involved in his 
father’s forfeiture, if born subsequent to the act occasioning it. 
Born before, he is entitled to inherit, and takes, as though his 
father were dead. Whereas, in every other instance of exclusion, 
the son, if not actually in the same predicament with his father, 
succeeds, maintaining him; the same right extending as far as 
the great grandson. And, with regard to the father, or delinquent 
himself, where the exclusion from inheriting is not for natural 


175 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


176 


176 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


defects, the cause must have arisen, previous to the division, or 
descent of the property; if it do not occur till after, the succession 
is not divested by it. Hence, adultery in the wife during coverture, 
bars her right of inheritance; divesting it also, after it has vested; 
the Hindu widow resembling, in this respect, the condition of ours 
in most instances of copyhold dower, and holding it, like her, Dum 
casta fuerit only; according to an opinion of great respectability, 
that for loss of caste, unexpiated by penance, and unredeemed by 
atonement, it is forfeited. In general, the law of disqualification 
applies alike to both sexes. 

“It appearing, then, that the incapacity to inherit, except in the 
instance of the outcaste, is personal merely; that one excluded may 
be said, in every case, to be entitled to be maintained; and that, 
in most, it is in his power, at any time, to restore himself to his 
rights; — whatever may be thought of the wisdom of some of these 
provisions, it cannot be said that they are universally destitute 
of justice, or, in any instance, totally devoid of humanity. Nor, in 
comparing this part of the law with our own, ought we to forget, that 
the latter has made none, for preventing the absolute disinheriting 
of children by will. 

“It will appear, in a subsequent chapter, that, on entry into either 
of the two religious orders, the devotee (like the professed monk with 
us before the Reformation) becomes Civiliter mortuus; and the next 
heir succeeds, as though he were naturally deceased, and, as the 
devotee himself, abdicating secular concerns, is incapacitated from 
inheriting, so is the religious pretendek, and the eventual Apostate. 
Under the former term may be included Hypocrites and Impostors, 
used synonymously for those who, usurping sacred marks, practise 
austerities with an interested design. 

The remaining cause of exclusion to be noticed, is, an Incompetent 
marriage; that is, where the husband and wife are descended from 
the same Stock. Such a marriage being incongruous, the issue of it 
cannot inherit, excepting among Shudras. And the consequence is 
the same, where the marriage has not been according to the order 
of Class. 

“The heir, or heirs, under no disability, having succeeded to the 
inheritance, it is next to be seen, to what Charge this is liable.” 

Has Caste also a religious sanction? The Vedas recognize Caste. 

The Rig Vedas recognized Caste and also explains its origin in the 
following passage: 

“1. Purusha has a thousand heads, a thousand eyes, a thousand feet. On 
every side enveloping the earth, he overpassed (it) by a space of ten 
fingers. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


177 


THE ROCK ON WHICH IT IS BUILT 177 

2. Purusha himself is this whole (universe), whatever has been and 
whatever shall be. He is also the lord of immortality, since (or, when) 
by food he expands. 

3. Such is his greatness, and Purusha is superior to this. All existences are 
a quarter of him; and three fourths of him are that which is immortal 
sky. 

4. With three quarters Purusha mounted upwards. A quarter of him was 
again produced here. He was then diffused everywhere over things 
which eat and things which do not eat. 

5. From him was born Viraj, and from Viraj, Purusha. When born, he 
extended beyond the earth, both behind and before. 

6. When the gods performed a sacrifice with Purusha as the oblation, 
the spring was its butter, the summer its fuel, and autumn its 
(accompanying) offering. 

7. This victim, Purusha, born in the beginning, they immolated on the 
sacrificial grass. With him the gods, the Sadhyas, and the rishis 
sacrificed. 

8. From that universal sacrifice were provided curds and butter. It formed 
those aerial (creatures) and animals both wild and tame. 

9. From that universal sacrifice sprang the rich and saman verses, the 
metres, and yajush. 

10. From it sprang horses, and all animals with two rows of teeth; kine 
sprang from it; from it goats and sheep. 

11. When (the gods) divided Purusha, into how many parts did they cut him 
up ? What was his mouth ? What arms (had he) ? What (two objects) 
are said (to have been) his thighs and feet? 

12. The Brahman was his mouth; the Rajanya was his arms; the being 
(called) the Vaishya, he was his thighs, the Shudra sprang from his 
feet. 

13. The moon sprang from his soul (manas), the sun from his eye, Indra 
and Agni from his mouth, and Vayu from his breath. 

14. From his navel arose the air, from his head the sky, from his feet 
the earth, from his ear the (four) quarters; in this manner (the gods) 
formed the worlds. 

15. When the gods, performing sacrifice, bound Purusha as a victim, there 
were seven sticks (stuck up) for it (around the fire), and thrice seven 
pieces of fuel were made. 

16. With sacrifice the gods performed the sacrifice. These were the earliest 
rites. These great powers have sought the sky, where are the former 
Sadhyas, gods.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


178 


178 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Brahmanas also recognize Caste. In the Satapatha-Brahmanas 
Caste is mentioned in the following terms: 

“23. Brahma (here, according to the commentator, existing in the form of 
Agni, and representing the Brahman caste was formerly this (universe), 
one only. Being one, it did not develope. It energetically created an 
excellent form, the Kshattra, viz., those among the gods, who are 
powers (Kshattrani), Indra, Varuna, Soma, Rudra, Parjanya, Yama, 
Mrityu, Isana. Hence nothing is superior to the Kshattra. Therefore the 
Brahman sits below the Kshattriya at the rajasuya-sacrifice; he confers 
that glory on the Kshattra (the royal power). This, the Brahma, is the 
source of Kshattra. Hence, although the king attains supremacy, he at 
the end resorts to the Brahman as his source. Whoever destroys him 
(the Brahman) destroys his own source. He becomes most miserable, 
as one who has injured a superior. 

24. He did not develope. He created the Vis. — viz., those classes of gods 
who are designated by troops, Vasus, Rudras, Adityas, Visvedevas, 
Maruts. 

25. He did not develope. He created the Shudra Class, Pushan. This earth 
is Pushan; for she nourishes all that exists. 

26. He did not develope. He energetically created an excellent form, Justice 
(Dharma). This is the ruler (kshattra) of the ruler (kshattra), namely 
Justice. Hence nothing is superior to justice. Therefore the weaker 
seeks (to overcome) the stronger by justice, as by a king. This justice is 
truth. In consequence they say of a man who speaks truth, ‘he speaks 
justice’; or of man who is uttering justice, ‘he speaks truth’. For this 
is both of these. 

27. This is the Brahma, Kshattra, Vis and Sudra. Through Agni it became 
Brahma among the gods, the Brahman among men, through the (divine) 
Kshattriya a (human) Kshattriya, through the (divine), Vaishya a 
(human) Vaisya, through the (divine) Sudra a (human) Sudra. Wherefore 
it is in Agni among the gods and in a Brahman among men, that they 
seek after an abode.” 

Taittiriya Brahmana, i. 2, 6, 7 . — daivyo vai varno brahmanh 

assuryyo sudrah. “The Brahman caste is sprung from the gods; the 

Sudra from the Asuras.” 

It must be admitted that the legal and the religious sanction were 
both powerful engines to keep caste going. But there is no doubt that 
the religious sanction was the primary sanction and caste has been 
maintained solely by the force of Religious Sanction. This is clear from 
two circumstances. That the legal sanction was very seldom invoked 
will have to be admitted. That means that the maintenance of caste 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


179 


THE ROCK ON WHICH IT IS BUILT 179 

was secured by other means. Secondly this legal sanction was in use only 
till 1850. It was lifted or rather done away with by the Caste Disabilities 
Removal Act passed in that year by the British Government. Although 
the legal sanction is withdrawn, caste has gone on without abatement. 
That could not have happened if caste had not in the Religious Sanction 
another and more powerful sanction independent of the legal sanction. 

That the Religious Sanction is the highest sanction which an 
institution or a belief can have to support and sustain it, is beyond 
question. Its power is boundless in its measure and tremendous in its 
curb. But it is very seldom understood how and whence this Religious 
Sanction gets this high-grade horse-power. To appreciate this it is 
necessary to note that the soure of authority behind the Religious 
Sanction is two-fold. 

In the first place what is Religious is also Social. To quote Prof. 
Durkheim. 1 

“The really religious beliefs are always common to a determined 
group, which makes profession of adhereing to them and of practising 
the rites connected with them. They are not merely received 
individually by all the members of this group; they are something 
belonging to the group, and they make its unity. The individuals 
which compose it feel themselves united to each other by the simple 
fact that they have a common faith.” 

In the second place what is Religious is Sacral. To quote Durkheim 
again : 2 

“All known religious beliefs whether simple or complex, present 
one common characteristic; they presuppose a classification of all 
the things, real and ideal, of which men think, into two classes or 
opposed groups, generally designated by two distinct terms which 

are translated well enough by the words profane and sacred In 

all the history of human thought there exist no other example of 
two categories of things so profoundly differentiated or so radically 
opposed to one another. The traditional opposition of good and 
bad is nothing besides this; for the good and the bad are only two 
opposed species of the same class, namely morals, just as sickness 
and health are two different aspects of the same order of facts, life, 
while the Sacred and the profane have always and everywhere been 
conceived by the human mind as two distinct classes, as two worlds 

between there is nothing in common Religious beliefs are the 

representations which express the nature of sacred things and the 

1 Elementary Forms of Religious Life. pp. 37-40. 

2 Ibid., p. 43. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


180 


180 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

relations which they sustain, either with each other or with profane 
things (while) rites are the rules of conduct which prescribe how a man 
should comfort himself in the presence of these Sacred objects.” 

From this it will be clear that the Social, Religious and Sacral 
beliefs are closely knit. Religious is social though all that is social is 
not religious. Sacral is social though all that is social is not sacral. On 
the other hand the religious is both social and sacral. 

One soure of authority behind the religious sanction comes from the 
fact, that is, religion is social and the religious beliefs are social beliefs. 
Religious beliefs are enforced on the individual by the group in the same 
manner and for the same reasons which leads it to enforce its other 
non-religious and purely social beliefs. The object is to maintain the 
integrity of the group and as the integrity of the group is more closely 
bound up with its religious beliefs, the strictness and severity with which 
a group punishes the breach of a religious belief is usually greater than 
the degree of strictness and severity it employs for the chastizement of 
a person guilty of a breach of a non-religious belief. Social force has an 
imperative authority before which the individual is often powerless. In 
the matter of a religious belief the imperative authority of the social 
force is tempered as steel is by the feeling that it is a breach of a graver 
kind and gives religious sanction a far greater force than a purely social 
sanction has. 

The Sacral source of the authority behind religious sanction comes 
primarily from the individual and only secondarily from the group. That 
is the noteworthy peculiarity of the social source of religious sanction. It 
prepares the individual to uphold the religious beliefs. It dispenses with 
the necessity of the group using its social group. That is why the sacral 
source of its authority makes religious sanction of such high order as to 
supersede all other sanctions indeed to dispense with them. That is why 
the Religious Sanction alone becomes sufficient to maintain the integrity 
of religious beliefs which even time and circumstances have proved 
powerless to affect. The way this happens is easy to follow. The Sacred 
inspires in the individual the sentiment of reverence and deference which 
he certainly has not for the profane. To use the language of Durkheim, 

“The simple defence inspired by men with high social functions 
is not different in nature from religious respect (for the sacred). It 
is expressed by the same movements: a man keeps at a distance 
from high personage; he approaches him only with precautions; in 
conversing with him, he used other gestures and language than that 
used with ordinary mortals.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


181 


THE ROCK ON WHICH IT IS BUILT 181 

The Sacred creates the sentiment of Reverence. It also creates the 
sentiment that it is inviolate. When a belief becomes consecrated as a 
Sacred thing, it is forbidden to touch it, to deny it or to contest it. There 
is a prohibition of criticism of the Sacred. The Sacred is ‘untouchable and 
above discussion’. When an individual is saturated with these sentiments, 
when these sentiments become a part of his being, he himself becomes 
an upholder and protector of what he is taught to regard as something 
sacred. 

This is exactly what the Hindus have done in the matter of Caste. 
They have given caste a place in the Vedas. Caste has thereby become 
sacred because the Vedas are Sacred. It would be wrong to say that the 
Vedas are sacred because they are religious. The position is that they 
are religious because they are sacred. 

It might appear that the Hindus have no name for the Veda directly 
expressing the feeling of sacredness which the Hindu entertains towards 
the Vedas. Veda simply means knowledge. That may be so. But there 
can be no doubt that they regard the Vedas as sacred. Indeed the term 
they apply to Vedas expresses a far greater degree of reverence than 
the word sacred does. They call the Vedas Shruti — which means the 
word of God heard by (i.e. revealed to) man. In the primitive religion 
the Sacred is what man has made. In the Hindu religion the Sacred is 
what God has appointed it to be. 

The Hindus regard the Vedas as the Sacred Book of their religion. 
They put the Vedas in a class by themselves. The Hindus hold 1 that 
there are cycles of creations called Kalpas. At the end of every cycle there 
is a deluge and a new cycle of creation begins. At the end of a Kalpa, 
the Vedas are destroyed in the deluge. At the beginning of every Kalpa 
they are revealed by God. Accordingly the Vedas were destroyed in the 
deluge at the end of the last Kalpa and that the beginning of the present 
Kalpa commencing with the Krita Yug, they were revealed by God to 
the Rishis. The Vedas are regarded by the Hindus as Nitya (enternal) 
Anadi (beginningless) and Apaurusheya (not made by man), In short the 
Vedas are the words of God and constitute God’s ordinances to man. 

Even if the Vedas were not called Shruti they would have had 
the imperativeness of the ‘Sacred’. Religions have been variously 
classified by Prof. Max Muller . 2 Natural as against Revealed is one 
way of classifying them. Individual as against National is another way. 
The third way of classifying them is to call them Atheistic, Deitistic, 
Dualistic, Polytheistic, Monotheistic, Henotheistic and Animistic. True 

1 M. Krishnamachariar — Classical Sanskrit Literature. Introduction, pp. vii-viii and p. 836. 

2 Introduction to the Science of Religion. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


182 


182 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and False is also another way of classifying Religions. Bookless Religions 
and Religions with books are two classes into which Religion could be 
grouped. This probably does not exhaust the ways of classifying Religions. 
For there remains one more distinction to be made, namely Religions 
which have founders and religions which have no founders. 

These distinctions have social significance except two. They are the 
distinctions between Natural and Revealed and that between Bookless 
Religion and Book Religion. They differ in their function although that 
difference is not often noted. 

The Book religion has a definite advantage over a Bookless religion. A 
Book religion is a Religion with a written constitution. A Bookless Religion 
is a Religion without a written constitution. A book religion creates the 
impression that it is true which a bookless religion cannot. By comparison 
with a book religion, a bookless religion wears the inferiority complex 
of being false. In the language of Max Muller Religions with books are 
alone “considered as real religions, and though they may contain false 
doctrines, they are looked upon as a kind of aristocracy to whom much 
may be forgiven, while the vulgar crowd of bookless or illiterate religions 
are altogether out of Court It is easy to understand the superiority 
accorded to a religion with a book over a bookless religion. When ‘black 
on white’ has become synonymous with true, it may seem very natural 
that a religion which is written, which is something black on white is 
not false. The Book serves as the voucher for truth. A religion without 
a book has no voucher. 

The social significance of a religion with a book lies in the fact that 
it controls the mind of the people by giving them the impression that 
the religion contained in the book is true. It gives Religion authority 
over people and induces willing obedience in them. 

But however a Religion may appear to be true by reason of the fact 
that it is a book religion, such appearance cannot save Religion from 
going under, if beliefs and rites empirically erroneous have crept into 
it. Man may go wrong in theory but his practical instincts will seldom 
allow him to go after a wrong theory for a long time. Unless therefore 
the religious beliefs of a social group are true, practically Religion must 
in the long run give way. 

Herein comes the social significance of the distinction between 
Natural Religion and Revealed Religion. A Revealed Religion has 
superiority over Natural Religion. Natural Religion is used by several 
writers to certain historical forms of religion. Something which has 
grown along with the growth of people — as a result of the interaction 


Natural Religion, p. 549. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


183 


THE ROCK ON WHICH IT IS BUILT 183 

between the needs of the peoples and the environment in which they are 
placed. A natural religion is made by man. Its sanction is the sense of 
truth and the voice of conscience that is to be found in man. A Revealed 
Religion does not rest on the authority of man. It is not man-made, it is 
God-made. Its sanction is God who is absolute truth and absolute good. 
The function of Revealed Religion is to make religion sacred therefore 
inviolate and immune from criticism. 

The Vedas have the characteristics of both. They have the advantage 
which a Religion with a book has over the Bookless Religion. They have 
the advantage which a Revealed Religion has over Natural Religion. 

This discussion is intended to enforce the conclusion that Caste being 
preached by the Vedas, it automatically gets the authority of the written 
book and the sanctity of the divine word. As a scheme propounded by 
the Veda it is doubly protected. Every one must accept Caste because 
it is divine truth and no body must attack it as an error without being 
guilty of sacrilege because it is sacred. 

This is the Hindu view of Caste and the average Hindu is not 
impressed by the modern explanation of it by Risley with his racial 
theory, by Senart with his occupational theory, by Nesfield with his 
functional theory. He knows and he believes that Caste must have been 
created by God, because it is mentioned in the Vedas which is Shruti 
or the word of God. It is therefore eternal and true. 

That Caste is. divine, that caste is sacred and that caste must therefore 
remain eternal has been the line of defence adopted by the Brahmins 
whenever they have been called out to defend ‘Caste’ against the criticism 
of its opponents. This view of Caste comes out in its luminous colours in 
the controversy that once raged on the subject of Caste between Brahmins 
on the one hand and Buddha and his followers, on the other i.e.: 

“If the belief was once established, that not only the simple 
effusions of the Rishis, but the pointed doctrines of the Brahmanas 
also, emanated from a divine source, and could not therefore be 
attacked by human reasoning, it is clear that every opposition to 
the privileges which the Brahmans claimed for themselves, on the 
sacred authority of the Veda, became heresy; and where the doctrines 
of the Brahmans were the religion of the people, or rather of the 
king, such opposition was amenable to the hierarchical laws of 
the state. The Brahmans themselves cared much more to see the 
divine authority of the Sruti as such implicitly acknowledged, than 
to maintain the doctrines of the Rishis in their original simplicity 
and purity. In philosophical discussions, they allowed the greatest 

1 Soure of the following quotations upto page 167 is not mentioned in the M.S. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


184 


184 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

possible freedom; and, although at first three philosophical systems 
only were admitted as orthodox (the two Mimansas and the Nyaya), 
their number was soon raised to six, so as to include the Vaiseshika, 
Sankhya, and Yoga-schools. The most conflicting views on points of 
vital importance were tolerated as long as their advocates succeeded, 
no matter by what means, in bringing their doctrines into harmony 
with passages of the Veda, strained and twisted in every possible 
sense. If it was only admitted that besides the perception of the 
senses and the induction of reason, revelation also, as contained in 
the Veda, furnished a true basis for human knowledge, all other 
points seemed to be of minor importance. Philosophical minds were 
allowed to exhaust all possible views on the relation between the 
real and transcendental world, the Creator and the created, the 
divine and the human nature. It was not from such lucubrations that 
danger was likely to accrue to the caste of the Brahmans. Nor was 
the heresy of Buddha Sakya Muni found so much in his philosophical 
doctrines, many of which may be traced in the orthodox atheism of 
Kapila. His real crime lay in his opposition to the exclusive privileges 
and abuses of the Brahmans. These abuses were sanctioned by the 
divine authority of the Veda, and particularly of the Brahmans. In 
attacking the abuses, Buddha attacked the divine authority on which 
they were founded, and the argument was short: he is a heretic; 
anathema etc. 

“ Buddha was Kshatriya. He was of principal origin, and belonged 
to the nobility of the land. He was not the first of his caste who 
opposed the ambition of the Brahmans. Several centuries before 
Buddha, Visvamitra, who, like Buddha, was a member of the royal 
caste, had to struggle against the exclusiveness of the priests. At 
that early time, however, the position of the Brahmans was not yet 
impregnable; and Visvamitra, although a Kshatriya, succeeded in 
gaining for himself and his family the rights for which he struggled, 
and which the Brahmans had previously withheld from all but their 
own caste. King Janaka of Videha again, whose story is given in 
the Brahmanas, refused to submit to the hierarchical pretensions 
of the Brahmans, and asserted his right of performing sacrifices 
without the intercession of priests. However great the difference 
may have been between the personal character of these two men and 
of Buddha, the first principle of their opposition was the same. All 
three were equally struggling against the over-weening pretensions 
of a selfish priesthood. 

“But while Visvamitra contented himself with maintaining the 
rights of his tribe or family, and became reconciled as soon as he 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


185 


THE ROCK ON WHICH IT IS BUILT 

was allowed to share in the profits of the priestly power, while King 
Janaka expressed himself satisfied with the homage paid to him 
by Yajnavalkya and other Brahmans, while, in short, successive 
reformers as they appeared were either defeated or gained over to 
the cause of the Brahmans, — the seeds of discontent were growing 
up in the minds of the people. There is a dark chapter in the 
history of India, the reported destruction of all the Kshatriyas by 
Parsurama. It marks the beginning of the hierarchical supremacy 
of the Brahmans. Though the Brahmans seem never to have 
aspired to the royal power, their caste, as far as we know the 
history and traditions of India, has always been in reality the 
ruling caste. Their ministry was courted as the only means of 
winning divine favour, their doctrines were admitted as infallible, 
their gods were worshipped as the only true gods, and their voice 
was powerful enough to stamp the simple strains of the Rishis, 
and the absurd lucubrations of the authors of the Brahmans, with 
a divine authority. After this last step, however, the triumph 
of Brahmanism was preparing its fall. In India, less than in 
any other country, would people submit to a monopoly of truth; 
and the same millions who were patiently bearing the yoke of a 
political despotism threw off the fetters of an intellectual tyranny. 
In order to overthrow one of the oldest religions of the world, it 
was sufficient that one man should challenge the authority of the 
Brahmans, the gods of the earth (Bhudeva), and preach among 
the scorned and degraded creatures of God the simple truth that 
salvation was possible without the mediation of priests, and without 
a belief in books to which these very priests had given the title of 
revelation. This man was BUDDHA, a SAKYA MUNI. Now if we 
inquire how Buddha’s doctrines were met by the Brahmans, it is 
true that here and there in their philosophical works, they have 
endeavoured to overthrow some of his metaphysical axioms by an 
appeal to reason. An attempt of this kind we have, for instance, 
in Vachaspati Misra’s commentary on the Vedanta Sutras. In 
commenting on the tenets of Buddha, that “ideas like those of 
being, and not being, &c, do not admit of discussion”, Vachaspati 
observes that the very fact of speaking of these ideas, includes 
the possibility of their conception; nay, that to affirm they do not 
admit of reasoning, involves an actual reasoning on them, and 
proves that the mind can conceive the idea of being as different 
from that of not-being. 

“Such, however, were not the usual weapons with which 
Brahmanism fought against Buddhism. The principal objection has 
always been, that Buddha’s teaching could not be true, because it 


185 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


186 


186 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

did not derive its sanction from Sruti or revelation. The Brahmans, 
as a caste, would readily have allowed being and not being, and the 
whole of Buddha’s philosophy, as they did the Sankhya philosophy, 
which on the most important points is in open opposition to the 
Vedanta. But while Kapila, the founder of the Sankhya school, 
conformed to the Brahmanic test by openly proclaiming the authority 
of revelation as paramount to reasoning and experience, Buddha 
would not submit to this, either for his philosophical (abhidharma), 
or for his much more important moral and religious doctrines 
(vinaya). No doubt it would have been easy for him to show how 
some of his doctrines harmonised with passages of the Veda, as 
in the Veda all possible shades of the human mind have found 
their natural reflection. If he had done so only for some of his 
precepts, such, for instance, as, “Thou shall not murder”, “Thou 
shall not drink”, “Thou shall eat standing”, the Brahmans would 
readily have passed over other doctrines, even such as came into 
practice after Buddha’s death, like “Who longs for heaven, shall 
worship the holy sepulchre”, “He shall pull out his hair”, &c. As 
he refused to do so, the line of argument taken by the Brahmans 
was simply confined to an appeal to revelation, in disproof of the 
possibility of the truth of Buddha’s doctrines. 

“There must be something very tempting in this line of 
argument, for we see that in later times the Buddhists also 
endeavoured to claim the same divine character for their sacred 
writings which the Brahmans had established for the Veda. A 
curious instance of this is given in the following discussion, from 
Kumarila’s Tantra-varttika. Here the opponent (purva-paksha) 
observes, that the same arguments which prove that the Veda is 
not the work of human authors, apply with equal force to Sakya’s 
teaching. His authority, he says, cannot be questioned, because 
his precepts are clear and intelligible; and as Sakya is not the 
inventor, but only the teacher of these precepts, and no name of 
an author is given for Sakya’s doctrines, the frailties inherent 
in human authors affect them as little as the Veda. Everything, 
in fact, he concludes, which has been brought forward by the 
Mimansakas to prove the authority of the Veda, proves in the 
same way the authority of Buddha’s doctrine, Upon this, the 
orthodox Kumarila grows very wroth, and says: “These Sakyas, 
Vaiseshikas, and other heretics who have been frightened out 
of their wits by the faithful Mimansakas, prattle away with our 
own words as if trying in lay hold of a shadow. They say that 
their sacred works are eternal; but they are of empty minds, and 
only out of hatred they wish to deny that the Veda is the most 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


187 


THE ROCK ON WHICH IT IS BUILT 187 

ancient book. And these would-be logicians declare even, that 
some of their precepts (which they have stolen from us,) like that 
of universal benevolence, are not derived from the Veda, because 
most of Buddha’s other sayings are altogether against the Veda. 
Wishing, therefore, to keep true on this point also, and seeing that 
no merely human precept could have any authority on moral and 
supernatural subjects, they try to veil their difficulty by aping our 
own argument for the eternal existence of the Veda. They know that 
the Mimansakas have proved that no sayings of men can have any 
authority on supernatural subjects; they know also that the authority 
of the Veda cannot be controverted, because they can bring forward 
nothing against the proofs adduced for its divine origin, by which 
all supposition of a human source have been removed. Therefore, 
their hearts being gnawed by their own words, which are like the 
smattering of children, and having themselves nothing to answer, 
because the deception of their illogical arguments has been destroyed, 
they begin to speak like a foolish suitor who came to ask for a bride, 
saying, ‘My family is as good as your family’. In the same manner 
they now maintain the eternal existence of their books, aping the 
speeches of others. And if they are challenged and told that this is 
our argument, they brawl, and say that we, the Mimansakas have 
heard and stolen it from them. For a man who has lost all scheme, 
who can talk away without any sense, and tries to cheat his opponent, 
will never get tired, and will never be put down!” Towards the end 
of this harangue, Kumarila adds, what is more to the point, that the 
Buddhas, who ascribe to everything a merely temporary existence, 
have no business to talk of an eternal revelation.” 

From the foregoing discussion it will be seen that Caste is born in 
religion which has consecrated it and made it Sacred so that it can be 
rightly and truly said that Religion is the Rock on which the Hindus 
have built their social structure. 

Does this not show that Caste is a very peculiar institution not to 
be compared with other forms of social grouping? I venture to say that 
any one who maintains that there is nothing strange in caste simply 
does not know what Caste is. I repeat that Caste is Sacred, which is its 
distinguishing feature. Caste is Sacred, which is what makes it abiding. 

Prof. Max Muller makes some very instructive observations on the 
effects of Religion with Sacred books on the progress of Society. Says 
Max Muller: 

“History, however, teaches us another lesson, namely that codes 
of law are apt to become a kind of fetish, requiring an implicit and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


188 


188 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

unquestioning submission, that their historical or natural origin is 
often completely forgotten, and that the old ideas of what is right 
and just are almost absorbed, nay, almost annihilated, in the one 
idea of what is written and legal. 

“The study of Eastern religions teaches us the same lesson. 
Sacred books often become a kind of fetish, requiring an implicit 
and unquestioning faith; their historical or natural origin is often 
completely forgotten, and the old ideas of what is true and divine 
are almost absorbed in the one idea of what is written and orthodox. 

“And there is a third lesson which history teaches us. The 
sense of responsibility of every citizen for the law under which he 
lives is in great danger of becoming deadened, when law becomes 
a profession and is administered with mechanical exactness rather 
than with a strong human perception of what is right and what 
is wrong. Nor can it be denied that the responsibility of every 
believer for the religion under which he lives is in the same danger 
of becoming deadened, when religion becomes a profession, and is 
administered with ceremonial exactness rather than with a strong 
human perception of what is true and what is false. 

“My object, however, is not to show the dangers which arise 
from sacred books, but rather to protest against the prejudice which 
prevails so widely against religions which have no sacred books. 

“There is great difference between book-religions and bookless 
religions, and the difference offers, from an historical point of view, 
a very true ground of division. But because the book-religions, 
have certain advantages, we must not imagine that the bookless 
religions are mere outcasts. They have their disadvantages, no 
doubt; but they have a few advantages also. 

“A Blackfoot Indian, when arguing with a Christian missionary, 
described the difference between his own religion and that of the 
white man in the following words: 

‘There were two religions given by the Great Spirit, one in a book 
for the guidance of the white men who, by following its teachings, 
will reach the white man’s heaven; the other is in the hands of the 
Indians, in the sky, rocks, rivers, and mountains. And the red men 
who listen to God in nature will hear his voice, and find at last 
the heaven beyond.’ 

“Now that religion which is in the head and in the heart, and 
in the sky, the rocks, the rivers and the mountains is what we call 
Natural Religion. It has its roots in nature, in human nature, and in 
that external nature which to us is at the same time the veil and the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


189 


THE ROCK ON WHICH IT IS BUILT 189 

revelation of the Divine. It is free, it grows with the growth of the 
human mind, and adapts itself to the requirements of every age. 

It does not say, ‘Thou shalt’, but rather, ‘I will'. These natural 
or bookless religions are not entirely without settled doctrines 
and established customs. They generally have some kind of 
priesthood to exercise authority in matters of faith, morality, and 
ceremonial. But there is nothing hard and unchangeable in them, 
nothing to fetter permanently the growth of thought. Errors when 
discovered, can be surrendered, a new truth, if clearly seen and 
vigorously defended, can be accepted. If, however, there is once 
a book, something black on white, the temptation is great, is 
almost irresistible, to invest it with a more than human authority 
in order to appeal to it as infallible, and as beyond the reach 
of human reasoning. We can well understand what the ancient 
poets of the Veda meant by calling their hymns God-given, or 
by speaking of them as what they had seen or heard, not what 
they had elaborated themselves. But a new generation gave a 
new meaning to these expressions, and ended by representing 
every thought and word and letter of the Veda as ‘God-given,’ or 
revealed. This was the death-blow given to the Vedic religion, for 
whatever cannot grow and change must die. From this danger the 
bookless religion are exempt.” 

Similar observations are made by Sir William Muir. Speaking of 
Islam he has given powerful expression to the dangers arising from 
Sacred Codes of Religion. Sir William Muir says: 

“ From the stiff and rigid shroud in which it is thus swathed, the 
religion of Mahomed cannot emerge. It has no plastic power beyond 
that exercised in its earliest days. Hardened now and inelastic, it 
can neither adapt itself, nor yet shape its votaries, nor even suffer 
them to shape themselves, to the varying circumstances, the wants 
and developments of mankind” . (Quoted by E de Bunsen in an 
article in the Asiatic Quarterly Review, April, 1889, Mahomed’s 
Place in the Church, p. 287.) 

Every one who is interested in the progress of humanity cannot fail 
to echo these sentiments regarding the social consequences of Sacred 
Codes of Religion. But it seems to me that a further distinction is 
possible within the Class of Religion with Sacred Codes. It is a pity that 
Prof. Max Muller did not pursue the matter further. But it is worth 
pursuing because it discloses a difference which is very real which 
marks off the Hindus as a people with a Sacred Code of Religion from 
other people also possessing a Sacred Code of Religion. The difference 
will be clear if one begins to examine the different religions to find 
out what are the objects which religions have sought to consecrate. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


190 


190 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Such an examination will show that there are instances where Society 
has consecrated inanimate things and inculcated on the minds of its 
members the religious belief that they are sacred. There are cases where 
stones, rivers, trees are made gods and goddesses. There are instances 
where Society has consecrated living things and inculcated on the minds 
of its members the religious belief that they are sacred. There are cases 
of animals which have become clan totems. There are instances where 
Society has consecrated human beings and inculcated the religious beliefs 
that they are sacred. But there are no instances where a particular 
Social Order has been consecrated by Religion and made Sacred. The 
primitive world had its clan order and its tribal order. But the clan or 
the tribal order was only a social order and was never consecrated by 
religion and made sacred and inviolate. The ancient world countries like 
Egypt, Persia, Rome, Greece etc., each had its social order in which some 
were free and some were slaves, some were citizens, some were aliens, 
some of one race, some of another. This class order again was only a 
social order and was never consecrated by religion and made sacred and 
inviolate. The modern world has its order, in some it is Democracy, in 
some Fascism, in some Nazism and in some Bolshevism. But here again 
the order is only Social order. It is not consecrated by religion and made 
sacred and inviolate. 

Nowhere has Society consecrated its occupations, the ways of getting 
a living. Economic activity has always remained outside the sanctity of 
religion. Hunting society was not without religion. But hunting as an 
occupation was not consecrated by religion and made sacred. Pastrol 
Society was not without religion. But pasturage was not consecrated 
by religion and made sacred. Farming as an occupation did not become 
consecrated by religion and made sacred. Feudalism with its gradations, 
with its Lords, villiens and serfs was a purely social in character. There 
was nothing sacred about it. 

The Hindus are the only people in the world whose Social order — 
the relation of man to man is consecrated by religion and made sacred 
eternal and inviolate. The Hindus are the only people in the world whose 
economic order — the relation of workman to workman — is consecrated 
by religion and made sacred, eternal and inviolate. 

It is not therefore enough to say that the Hindus are a people 
with a sacred code of Religion. So are the Zoroastrians, Israelites, 
Christians and Muslims. All these have sacred codes. They consecrate 
beliefs and rites and make them sacred. They do not prescribe, nor do 
they consecrate a particular form of social structure — the relationship 
between man and man in a concrete form — and make it sacred 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


191 


THE ROCK ON WHICH IT IS BUILT 191 

inviolate. The Hindus are singular in this respect. This is what has 
given caste its abiding strength to defy the ravages of time and the 
onslaughts of time. 

There is one other respect in which Hindus differ from other folk 
possessing codified religions similar to that of the Hindus. The Hindu 
Code of Religion is a revelation from God. That is why the Vedas are 
called Shruti (what is heard). So are the Codes of Religions accepted 
by the Zoroastrians, Jews, Christians and Muslims. Ask to whom this 
God’s word sent to the Zoroastrian, Jews, Christians, and Muslims was 
revealed, who heard this word of God ? The Zoroastrian will say that the 
word of God contained in their Religious Code was heard by Zoroaster. 
The Jews will say it was heard by Moses, Christians will say it was 
heard by Jesus and Muslims will say it was heard by Muhammad. Now 
ask the Hindu who heard the word of God contained in the Vedas, to 
whom was it revealed. The Hindu has no answer. He cannot name the 
person who heard this word of God. Now the Mantras contained in the 
Vedas have their authors mentioned in the Vedas themselves. But the 
Hindus will not say that these are the persons who heard the word of 
God which is contained in the Vedas. This difference goes a great way 
to protect the sacred character of the Vedas. For the Bible as a Sacred 
Book can be attacked by attacking the character of Moses or Jesus. 
Similarly the Koran as a Sacred Book can be attacked by attacking the 
character of Mahomed. But the Veda cannot be attacked by attacking 
the character of the messenger or the founder. For the simple reason 
that there is none. 

As I have said Religion is the Rock on which the Hindus have built 
their house. It will now be seen that it is not an ordinary sort of hard 
Rock. It is granite. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


192 


Chapter 18 

TOUCHABLES V/S UNTOUCHABLES 

i 

A relationship of touchables against untouchables may cause surprize. 
Such a surprize will not be altogether without reason. The touchables 
are not one uniform body of people. They are themselves divided into 
innumerable castes. Each Hindu is conscious of the caste to which he 
belongs. Given this heteroginity it does seem that to include all the 
touchable castes into one group and put them as forming a block against 
the untouchables is to create a division which can have no meaning. But 
although this division of touchables against untouchables may require 
explanation, the division so far as modern India is concerned is real 
and substantial. 

The explanation of how the touchables have now become one block 
and are conscious of their being different from the untouchables means 
nothing but recounting the mutual relationship of the four Varnas. 

At the outset it must be borne in mind that those who like 
Mr. Gandhi accept the Chaturvarna as an ideal form of society, either 
do not know the history of the mutual relations of the four Varnas or 
are cherishing an illusion or conjuring up a vision for purposes which 
they are out to serve. For, the fact is that the four Varnas never formed 
a society based on loving brotherhood or on economic organization based 
on cooperative effort. The four Varnas were animated by nothing but a 
spirit of animosity towards one another. There would not be the slightest 
exaggeration to say that the social history of the Hindus is a history 
not merely of class struggle but class war fought with such bitterness 
that even the Marxist will find it difficult to cite parallel cases to match. 

It seems that the first class-struggle took place between the Brahmins, 
Kshatriyas and Vaishyas on the one hand and the Shudras on the other. 

In Katyayana’s Srauta Sutras, it is said, that “men with the 
exception of those whose members are defective, who have not read the 
Veda, eunuchs, and Shudras, have a right to sacrifice. It is Brahmanas, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


193 


TOUCHABLES V/S UNTOUCHABLES 193 

Rajanyas and Vaishyas (only who) according to the Veda (possess this 
privilege)”. 

We are told by Manu that (Quotation not given in the MS.).* 

Manu also says that (Quotation not given in the MS.). 

Compare with this the following instances and statements relating 
to the status of the Shudra occurring in the Vedic literature of a period 
earlier than Manu and even earlier than Katyayana. 

Prof. Max Muller calls attention to two instances showing that Shudras 
were admitted to great sacrifices such as “gavedhukacharu ”. One is that 
of Rathakara and the other of Nishadasthapati, both Shudras. 

It might however be supposed that this was a concession made to the 
exceptional men from the Shudras. That it was not a mere concession 
but a right enjoyed by the Shudras is beyond question. In the Satapatha 
Brahmana which is a part of the Veda, the formula for the Brahmin 
Priest to call the sacrificer to come and make the oblation is given. 
He is asked to say ehi, come, in the case of a Brahman; Agahi ‘come 
hither’, in the case of a Vaishya; Adrava, hasten hither’ in the case of 
a Kshatriya and Adhava, run hither’ in the case of a Shudra. 

This passage is of very great importance. It shows that the Shudra 
had at one time the right to sacrifice. Otherwise a form of address for 
a Shudra sacrificer could not have found a place in the Vedic precept. 
If the Shudra had a right to sacrifice, they also must have had a right 
to study the Vedas. 

For, according to Katyayana, only those who had the right to read 
the Vedas were entitled to perform the sacrifice. That the Shudras were 
at one time entitled to read the Vedas is a fact which is well supported 
by tradition which is referred to in the Shanti Parva of the Mahabharat, 
where the sage Bhrigu answers the question “How is Varna to be 
determined ?” in the following terms: 

“There is no difference of castes; this world, having been at 
first created by Brahma entirely Brahmanic, became (afterwards) 
separated into castes in consequence of works. 6940. Those Brahmans 
(lit. twice born men), who were fond of sensual pleasure, fiery, 
irascible, prone to violence, who had forsaken their duty, and were 
red-limbed, fell into the condition of Kshatriyas. Those Brahmans, 
who derived their livelihood from kine, who were yellow, who 
subsisted by agriculture, and who neglected to practise their, duties, 
entered into the state of Vaisyas. Those Brahmans, who were 
addicted to mischief and falsehood, who were covetous, who lived 
* Attention of the reader is however, drawn to Chapter 16 of Vol. 3 of the present series 
which deals with Laws of Manu relating to the degradation of the Shudras and which 
seems relevant at this place. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


194 


194 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


by all kinds of works, who were black and had fallen from 
purity, sank into the condition of Sudras. Being separated 
from each other by these (works, the Brahmans became divided 
into different castes. Duty and the rites of sacrifice have not 
been always forbidden to (any of) them. Such are four classes 
for whom the Brahmanic Sarasvati was at first designed by 
Brahma, but who through their cupidity fell into ignorance.” 

Interpreting the word “Brahmanic Sarasvati” the Commentator 
says: 

“Sarasvati, consisting of the Veda, was formerly designed 
by Brahma for all the four castes; but the Shudras having 
through cupidity fallen into ‘ignorance i.e. of darkness,’ lost 
their right to the Veda.” 

After the Shudra was reduced came the turn of the Vaishya. 

The bitterest class war took place between the Brahmins and 
the Kashatriyas. The classical literature of the Hindus abounds in 
reference to class wars between these two Varnas. 

First was the conflict between the Brahmins and King Vena. 

“There was formerly a Prajapati (lord of creatures), a 
protector of righteousness, called Anga, of the race of Atri, and 
resembling him in power. His son was the Prajapati Vena, who 
was but indifferently skilled in duty, and was born of Sunitha, 
the daughter of Mritya. This son of the daughter of Kala (death), 
owing to the taint derived from his maternal grandfather, threw 
his duties behind his back and lived in covetousness under the 
unfluence of desire. This king established an irreligious system 
of conduct; transsgresing the ordinances of the Veda, he was 
devoted to lawlessness. In his reign men lived without study of 
the sacred books and without the vashatkara, and the gods had 
no Soma-libations to drink at sacrifices. ‘I’, he declared, ‘am the 
object, and the performer of sacrifice, and the sacrifice itself, it is 
to me that sacrifice should be presented, and oblations offered.’ 

This transgressor of the rules of duty, who arrogated to himself 
what was not his due, was then addressed by all the great 
rishis, headed by Marichi: ‘We are about to consecrate ourselves 
for a ceremony which shall last for many years, practice not 
unrighteousness, o Vena; this is not the eternal rule of duty. 

Thou art in very deed a Prajapati of Atri’s race, and thou hast 
engaged to protect thy subjects.’ The foolish Vena, ignorant of 
what was right, laughingly answered those great rishis who had 
so addressed him: ‘ Who but myself is the ordainer of duty? 
or whom ought I to obey? Who on earth equals me in sacred 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


195 


TOUCHABLES V/S UNTOUCHABLES 195 

knowledge, in prowess, in austere fervour, in truth? Ye who 
are deluded and senseless know not that I am the source of 
all beings and duties. Hesitate not to believe that I, if I willed, 
could burn up the earth, or deluge it with water, or close up 
heaven and earth’. When owing to his delusion and arrogance 
Vena could not be governed, then the mighty rishis becoming 
incensed, seized the vigorous and struggling king, and rubbed 
his left thigh. From this thigh, so rubbed, was produced a black 
man, very short in stature, who, being alarmed, stood with joined 
hands. Seeing that he was agitated, Atri said to him ‘Sit down’ 
(nishida). He became the founder of the race of the Nishadas, 
and also progenitor of the Dhivaras (fisherman), who sprang 
from the corruption of Vena. So too were produced from him 
the other inhabitants of the Vindhya range, the Tukharas and 
Tumburas, who are prone to lawlessness. Then the mighty sages, 
excited and incensed, again rubbed the right hand of Vena, as 
men do the Arani wood, and from it arose Pritha, respondent 
in body, glowing like the manifested Agni.” 

“The son of Vena (Prithu) then, with joined hands, addressed 
the great rishis: ‘A very slender understanding for perceiving 
the principles of duty has been given to me by nature; tell me 
truly how I must employ it. Doubt not that I shall perform 
whatever you shall declare to me as my duty, and its object.’ 
Then those gods and great rishis said to him: ‘Whatever duty 
is enjoined perform it, without hesitation, disregarding what 
thou mayest like or dislike, looking on all creatures with an 
equal eye, putting far from the lust, anger, cupidity, and pride. 
Restrain by the strength of thine arm all those men who swerve 
from righteousness, having a constant regard to duty. And 
in thought, act, and word take upon thyself, and continually 
renew, the engagement to protect the terrestrial Brahman 

(Veda or Brahmans?) And promise that thou wilt exempt 

the Brahmans from punishment, and preserve society from the 
confusion of Castes’. The son of Vena then replied to the gods, 
headed by the rishis: ‘The great Brahmans, the chief of men, 
shall be reverenced by me’. ‘So be it,’ rejoined those declares 
of the Veda. Sukra, the depository of divine knowledge, became 
his purohita; the Balakhilyas and Sarasvetyas his ministers; 
and the venerable Garga, the great rishi, his astrologer.” 

The second conflict took place between the Brahmins and the 
Kshatriya king Pururavas. A brief reference to it occurs in the 
Adiparva of the Mahabharat. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


196 


196 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“Subsequently the wise Pururavas was born of 11, who, as 
we have heard, was both his father and his mother. Ruling 
over thirteen islands of the ocean, and surrounded by being 
who were all superhuman, himself a man of great renown, 
Pururavas, intoxicated by his prowess, engaged in a conflict 
with the Brahmans, and robbed them of their jewels, although 
they loudly remonstrated. Sanatkumara came from Brahma’s 
heaven, and addressed to him an admonition, which, however, he 
did not regard. Being then straightway cursed by the incensed 
rishis, he perished, this covetous monarch, who, through pride 
of power, had lost his understanding. This glorious being (virat), 
accompanied by Urvasi, brought down for the performance 
of sacred rites the fires which existed in the heaven of the 
Gandharvas, properly distributed into three.” 

A third collision is reported to have occurred between the 
Brahmins and King Nahusha. The story is given in great details 
in the Udyogaparva of the Mahabharata. It is there recorded: 

“After his slaughter of the demon Vrittra, Indra became 
alarmed at the idea of having taken the life of a Brahmin (for 
Vrittra was regarded as such), and hid himself in waters. In 
consequence of the disappearance of the king of gods, all affairs, 
celestial as well as terrestrial, fell into confusion. The rishis 
and gods then applied to Nahusha to be their king. After at 
first excusing himself on the plea of want of power, Nahusha 
at length, in compliance with their solicitations, accepted the 
high function. Up to the period of his elevation he had led 
a virtuous life, but he now became addicted to amusement 
and sensual pleasure; and even aspired to the possession of 
Indrani, Indra’s wife, whom he had happened to see. The queen 
resorted to the Angiras Vrihaspati, the preceptor of the gods, 
who engaged to protect her. Nahusha was greatly incensed 
on hearing of this interference; but the gods endeavoured to 
pacify him, and pointed out the immorality of — appropriating 
another person’s wife. Nahusha, however, would listen to no 
remonstrance, and insisted that in his adulterous designs he 
was no worse than Indra himself; 373. The renowned Ahalya, a 
rishi’s wife, was formerly corrupted by Indra in her husband’s 
lifetime; Why was he not prevented by you? 374. And many 
barbarous acts, and unrighteous deeds, and frauds, were 
perpetrated of old by Indra; Why was he not prevented by 
you? The gods, urged by Nahusha, then went to bring Indrani; 
but Vrihaspati would not give her up. At his recommendation, 
however, she solicited Nahusha for some delay, till she should 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


197 


TOUCHABLES V/S UNTOUCHABLES 

ascertain what had become of her husband. This request was 
granted. The gods next applied to Vishnu on behalf of Indra; 
and Vishnu promised that if Indra would sacrifice to him, he 
should be purged from his guilt, and recover his dominion, while 
Nahusha would be destroyed. Indra sacrificed accordingly; and 
the result is thus told; “Having divided the guilt of Brahmanicide 
among trees, rivers, mountains, the earth, women, and the 
elements, Vasava (Indra), lord of the gods, became freed from 
suffering and sin, and self-governed.” Nahusha was by this 
means, shaken from his place. But (unless this is said by way 
of prelepsis, or there is some confusion in the narrative) he 
must have speedily regained his position, as we are told that 
Indra was again ruined, and became invisible. Indrani now 
went in search of her husband; and by the help of Upasruti (the 
goddess of night and revealer of secrets) discovered him existing 
in a very subtle form in the stem of a lotus growing in a lake 
situated in a continent within an ocean north of the Himalaya. 
She made known to him the wicked intention of Nahusha, and 
entreated him to exert his power, rescue her from danger, and 
resume his dominion. Indra declined any immediate interposition 
on the plea of Nahusha’s superior strength; but suggested to 
his wife a device by which the usurper might be hurled from 
his position. She was recommended to say to Nahusha that “if 
he would visit her on a celestial vehicle borne by rishis, she 
would with pleasure submit herself to him”. The question of the 
gods accordingly went to Nahusha, by whom she was graciously 
received, and made this proposal: “I desire for thee, king of 
the gods, a vehicle hitherto unknown, such as neither Vishnu, 
nor Rudra, nor the asuras, nor the rakshases employ. Let the 
eminent rishis, all united, bear thee, lord, in a car: this idea 
pleases me”. Nahusha receives favourably this appeal to his 
vanity, and in the course of his reply thus gives utterance to 
his self-congratulation: “He is a personage of no mean prowess 
who makes the munis his bearers. I am a fervid devotee of 
great might, lord of the past, the future and the present. If I 
were angry the world would no longer stand; on me everything 
depends.... Wherefore, O goddess, I shall, without doubt, carry 
out what you propose. The seven rishis, and all the Brahman- 
rishis, shall carry me. Behold beautiful goddess, my majesty, and 
my prosperity..” The narrative goes on: “Accordingly this wicked 
being, irreligious, violent, intoxicated by the force of conceit, 
and arbitrary in his conduct, attached to his car the rishis, who 
submitted to his commands, and compelled them to bear him”. 
Indrani then again resorts to Vrihaspati, who assures her that 


197 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


198 


198 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

vengeance will soon overtake Nahusha for his presumption; and 
promises that he will himself perform a sacrifice with a view 
to the destruction of the oppressor, and the discovery of Indra’s 
lurking place. Agni is then sent to discover and bring Indra 
to Vrihaspati; and the latter, on Indra’s arrival, informs him 
of all that had occurred during his absence. While Indra with 
Kuvera, Yama, Soma, and Varuna, was devising means for the 
destruction of Nahusha, the sage Agastya came up, congratulated 
Indra on the fall of his rival, and proceeded to relate how it 
had occurred: Wearied with carrying the sinner Nahusha, the 
eminent divine rishis, and the spotless brahman-rishis asked that 
divine personage Nahusha (to solve) a difficulty; ‘ Dost thou, a 
Vasava, most excellent of conquerors, regard as authoritative or 
not those Brahmana texts which are recited at the immolation 
of kine?’ ‘No’, replied Nahusha, whose understanding was 
enveloped in darkness. The rishis rejoined: ‘Engaged in 
unrighteousness, thou attainest not unto righteousness: these 
texts, which were formerly uttered by great rishis, are regarded 
by us as authoritative.’ The (proceeds Agastya) disputing with 
the munis, Nahusha, impelled by unrighteousness, touched me 
on the head with his foot. In consequence of this the king’s 
glory was smitten and his prosperity departed. When he had 
instantly become agitated and oppressed with fear, I said to 
him, ‘Since thou, O fool, contemnest that sacred text, always 
held in honour, which has been composed by former sages, and 
employed by brahman-rishis, and hast touched my head with 
thy foot, and employest the Brahma — like and irresistible rishis 
as bearers to carry thee, — therefore, shorn of thy lustre and all 
thy merit exhausted, sink down, sinner, degraded from heaven 
to earth. For then thousand years thou shalt crawl in the form 
of a huge serpent. When that period is completed, thou shalt 
again ascend to heaven’. So fell that wicked wretch from the 
sovereignty of the gods.” 

Next there is reference to the conflict between King Nimi and 
the Brahmins. The Vishnu Puran relates the story as follows: 

“Nimi had requested the Brahman-rishi Vashishtha to 
officiate at a sacrifice, which was to last a thousand years, 
Vashishtha in reply pleaded a pre-engagement to Indra for 
five hundred years, but promised to return at the end of 
that period. The king made no remark, and Vashishtha went 
away, supposing that he had assented to this arrangement. 

On his return, however, the priest discovered that Nimi 
had retained Gautama (who was, equally with Vashishtha a 
Brahman-rishi) and others to perform the sacrifice; and being 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


199 


TOUCHABLES V/S UNTOUCHABLES 199 

incensed at the neglect to give him notice of what was intended, he 
cursed the king, who was then asleep, to lose his corporeal form. 
When Nimi awoke and learnt that he had been cursed without 
any previous warning, he retorted, by uttering a similar curse on 
Vashishtha, and then died. “In consequence of this curse” (proceeds 
Vishnu Purana, iv. 5, 6) “the vigour of Vashishtha entered into 
the vigour of Mitra and Varuna. Vashishtha, however, received 
from them another body when their seed had fallen from them at 
the sight of Urvashi”. Nimi’s body was emblamed. At the close of 
the sacrifice which he had begun, the gods were willing, on the 
intercession of the priests, to restore him to life, but he declined 
the offer, and was placed by the deities, according to his desire, 
in the eyes of all living creatures. It is in consequence of this fact 
that they are always opening the shutting (Nimishas means “the 
twinkling of the eye”)”. 

Manu mentions another conflict between the Brahmins and King 
Sumukha. But of this no details are available. 

These are instances of conflict between the Brahmins and the 
Kshatriya Kings. From this it must not be supposed that the Brahmins 
and the Kshatriyas as two classes did not clash. That there were clashes 
between these two classes as distinguished from conflicts with kings is 
abundantly proved by material the historic value of which cannot be 
doubted. Reference may be made to three events. 

First is the contest between the Vishvamitra the Kshatriya and 
Vashishtha the Brahmin. The issue between the two was whether a 
Kshatriya can claim Brahminhood. 

The story is told in Ramayana and is as follows : 

“There was formerly, we are told, a king called Kusa, son of 
Prajapati, who had a son called Kushanabha, who was father of 
Gadhi, the father of Vishvamitra. The latter ruled the earth for 
many thousand years. On one occasion, when he was making a 
circuit of the earth, he came to Vashistha’s hermitage, the pleasant 
abode of many saints, sages, and holy devotees, where, after at first 
declining he allowed himself to be hospitably entertained with his 
followers by the son of Brahma. Vishvamitra, however, coveting 
the wondrous cow, which had supplied all the dainties of the feast, 
first of all asked that she should be given to him in exchange for a 
hundred thousand common cows, adding that “she was a gem, that 
gems were the property of the king, and that, therefore, the cow 
was his by right”. On this price being refused the king advances 
immensely in his offers, but all without effect. He then proceeds — 
very ungratefully and tyrannically, it must be allowed — to have the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


200 


200 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

cow removed by force, but she breaks away from his attendants, 
and rushes back to her master, complaining that he was 
deserting her. He replies that he was not deserting her, but 
that the king was much more powerful than he. She answers, 
“Men do not ascribe strength to a Kshatriya: the Brahmans are 
stronger. The Strength of Brahmans is divine, and superior to 
that of Kshatriya. Thy strength is immeasurable. Vishvamitra, 
though of great vigour, is not more powerful than thou. Thy 
energy is invincible. Commission me, who have been acquired 
by thy Brahmanical power, and I will destroy the pride, and 
force, and attempt of this wicked prince”. She accordingly by 
her bellowing creates hundreds of Pahalvas, who destroy the 
entire host of Vishvamitra, but are slain by him in their turn. 
Sakas and Yavans, of great power and valour, and well armed, 
were then produced, who consumed the king’s soldiers, but 
were routed by him. The cow then calls into existence by her 
bellowing, and from different parts of her body, other warriors of 
various tribes, who again destroyed Vishvamitra’s entire army, 
foot soldiers, elephants, horses, chariots, and all. A hundred of 
the monarch’s sons, armed with various weapons, then rushed 
in great fury on Vashishtha, but were all reduced to ashes in a 
moment by the blast of that sage’s mouth. Vishvamitra, being 
thus utterly vanquished and humbled, appointed one of his son 
to be regent, and travelled to the Himalaya, where he betook 
himself to austerities, and thereby obtained a vision of Mahadeva, 
who at his desire revealed to him the science of arms in all its 
branches, and gave him celestial weapons with which, elated 
and full of pride, he consumed the hermitage of Vashishtha, 
and put its inhabitants to flight. Vashishtha then threatens 
Vishvamitra and uplifts his Brahmanical mace. Vishvamitra too, 
raises his fiery weapon and calls out to his adversary to stand. 
Vashishtha bids him to show his strength, and boasts that he 
will soon humble his pride. He asks: “What comparison is there 
between a Kshatriya’s might, and the great might of a Brahman? 
Behold, thou contemptible Kshatriya, my divine Brahmanical 
power. The dreadful fiery weapon uplifted by the son of Gadhi 
was then quenched by the rod of the Brahman, as fire is by 
water.” Many and various other celestial missiles, as the nooses 
of Brahma, Kala (time), and Varuna, the discuss of Vishnu, and 
the trident of Siva, were hurled by Vishvamitra at his antagonist, 
but the son of Brahma swallowed them up in his all-devouring 
mace. Finally, to the intense consternation of all the gods, the 
warrior shot off the terrific weapon of Brahma (brahmastra); 
but this was equally ineffectual against the Brahmanical sage. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


201 


TOUCHABLES V/S UNTOUCHABLES 

Vashishtha had now assumed a direful appearance: “Jets of 
fire mingled with smoke darted from the pores of his body; the 
Brahmanical mace blazed in his hand like a smokeless mundane 
conflagration, or a second sceptre of Yama.” Being appeased, 
however by the munis, who proclaimed his superiority to his 
rival, the sage stayed his vengeance; and Vishvamitra exclaimed 
with a groan: “Shame on a Kshatriya’s strength: the strength of 
a Brahman’s might alone is strength: by the single Brahmanical 
mace all my weapons have been destroyed.” No alternative now 
remains, to the humiliated monarch, but either to acquiesce in 
this helpless inferiority, or to work out his own elevation to the 
Brahmanical order. He embraces the latter alternative: “Having 
pondered well this defeat, I shall betake myself, with composed 
senses and mind, to strenuous austere fervour, which shall exalt 
me to the rank of a Brahman”. Intensely vexed and mortified, 
groaning and full of hatred against his enemy, he travelled 
with his queen to the south, and carried his resolution into 
effect; and we are first of all told that three sons Havishyanda, 
Madhusyanda, and Dridhanetra were born to him. At the end 
of a thousands years Brahma appeared, and announced that 
he had conquered the heaven of royal sages (rajarshis); and, in 
consequence of his austere fervour, he was recognised as having 
attained that rank. Vishvamitra, however, was ashamed, grieved, 
and incensed at the offer of so very inadequate a reward, and 
exclaimed; “I have practised intense austerity, and the gods and 
rishis regard me only as a rajarshi. Austerities, it appears, are 
altogether fruitless”. Notwithstanding this disappointment, he 
had ascended one grade, and forthwith recommenced his work 
of mortification. 

“At this point of time his austerities were interrupted by 
the following occurrences: King Trisanku, one of Ikshvaku’s 
descendants, had conceived the design of celebrating a sacrifice 
by virtue of which he should ascend bodily to heaven. As 
Vashishtha, on being summoned, declared that the thing was 
impossible (asakyam), Trisanku travelled to the south, where 
the sage’s hundred sons were engaged in austerities, and 
applied to them to do what their father had declined. Though 
he addressed them with the greatest reverence and humility, 
and added that “the Ikshvaku regarded their family-priests 
as their highest resource in difficulties, and that, after their 
father, he himself looked to them as his tutelary deities” he 
received from the haughty priests the following rebuke for 
his presumption: “Asakyam” “Fool, thou hast been refused by 
thy truth speaking preceptor. How is it that, disregarding his 


201 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


202 


202 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

authority, thou hast resorted to another school (sakha). The 
family priest is the highest oracle of all the Ikshvakus; and the 
command of that veracious personages cannot be transgressed. 
Vashishtha, the. divine rishi, has declared that ‘the thing cannot 
be’; and how can we undertake thy sacrifice? Thou art foolish 
king; return to thy capital. The divine (Vashishtha) is competent 
to act as priest of the three worlds; how can we shew him 
disrespect ? ” Trisanku then gave them to understand, that as 
his preceptor and “his preceptor’s sons had declined compliance 
with his requests, he should think of some other expedient.” 
In consequence of his venturing to express this presumptuous 
intention, they condemned him by their imprecation to become 
a Chandala. As this curse soon took effect, and the unhappy 
king’s form was changed into that of a degraded outcast, he 
resorted to Vishvamitra (who, as we have seen, was also dwelling 
at this period in the south), enlarging on his own virtues and 
piety, and bewailing his fate. Vishvamitra commiserated his 
condition, and promised to sacrifice on his behalf, and exalt 
him to heaven in the same Chandala-form to which he had 
been condemned by his preceptor’s curse. “Heaven is now as 
good as in thy possession, since thou hast resorted to the son 
of Kusika”. He then directed that preparations should be made 
for the sacrifice, and that all the rishis, including the family of 
Vashishtha, should be invited to the ceremony. The disciples of 
Vishvamitra, who had conveyed his message, reported the result 
on their return in these words: “Having heard your message, 
all the Brahmans are assembling in all the countries, and have 
arrived, excepting Mahodaya (Vashishtha). Hear what dreadful 
words those hundred Vashishthas, their voices quivering with 
rage, have uttered: ‘How can the gods and rishis consume 
the oblation at the sacrifice of that man, especially if he be 
a Chandala, for whom a Kshatriya is officiating priest ? How 
can illustrious Brahmans ascend to heaven, after eating the 
food of a Chandala, and being entertained by Vishvamitra ? 
’’These ruthless words all Vashisthas, together with Mahodaya, 
uttered, their eyes inflamed with anger. Vishvamitra, who was 
greatly incensed on receiving this message, by a curse doomed 
the sons of Vashishtha to be reduced to ashes, and reborn 
as degraded outcasts (mritapah) for seven hundred births, 
and Mahodaya to become a Nishada. Knowing that this curse 
had taken effect, Vishvamitra thereafter eulogizing Trisanku, 
proposed to the assembled rishis that the sacrifice should be 
celebrated. To this they assented, being actuated by fear of 
the terrible sage’s wrath. Vishvamitra himself officiated at the 
sacrifice as yajakas; and the other rishis as priests (ritvijah) with 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


203 


TOUCHABLES V/S UNTOUCHABLES 203 

other functions performed all the ceremonies. Vishvamitra next 
invited the gods to partake of the oblations: “When, however, 
the deities did not come to receive their portions, Vishvamitra 
became full of wrath, and raising aloft the sacrificial ladle, 
thus addressed Trisanku: ‘Behold, O monarch, the power of 
austere fervour acquired by my own efforts. I myself, by my 
own energy, will conduct thee to heaven. Ascend to that celestial 
region which is so arduous to attain in an earthly body. I have 
surely earned some reward of my austerity’.” Trisanku ascended 
instantly to heaven in the sight of munis. Indra, however, 
ordered him to be gone, as person who, having incurred the 
curse of his spiritual preceptors, was unfit for the abode of the 
celestials; — and to fall down headlong to earth. He accordingly 
began to descend, invoking loudly, as he fell, the help of his 
spiritual patron. Vishvamitra, greatly incensed, called out to him 
to stop: “Then by the power of his divine knowledge and austere 
fervour created, like another Prajapati, other Seven Rishis (a 
constellation so called) in the southern part of the sky. Having 
proceeded to this quarter of the heavens, the renowned sage, in 
the midst of the rishis, formed another garland of stars, being 
overcome with fury. Exclaiming, ‘I will create another Indra, or 
the world shall have no Indra at all,’ he began, in his rage, to 
call gods also into being. The rishis, gods (Suras), and Asuras 
now became seriously alarmed and said to Vishvamitra, in a 
conciliatory tone, that Trisanku, “as he had been cursed by his 
preceptors, should not be admitted bodily into heaven, until 
he had undergone some lustration”. The sage replied that he 
had given a promise to Trisanku, and appealed to the gods to 
permit his protege to remain bodily in heaven, and the newly 
created stars to retain their places in perpetuity. The gods 
agreed that “these numerous stars should remain, but beyond 
the Sun’s path, and that Trisanku, like an immortal, with his 
head downwards should shine among them, and be followed by 
them,” adding “that his object would be thus attained, and his 
renown secured, and he would be like a dweller in heaven”. 

Thus was this great dispute adjusted by a compromise, which 
Vishvamitra accepted. 

“This story of Trisanku, it will have been observed, differs materially 
from the one quoted above from the Harivamsa; but brings out 
more distinctly the character of the conflict between Vashishtha and 
Vishvamitra. 

“When all the gods and rishis had departed at the conclusion of 
the sacrifice, Vishvamitra said to his attendant devotees; “This has 
been a great interruption (to our austerities) which has occurred in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


204 


204 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the southern region: we must proceed in another direction to 
continue our penances”. He accordingly went to a forest in the 
west, and began his austerities anew. Here the narrative is 
again interrupted by the introduction of another story, that of 
king Ambarisha, king of Ayodhya, who was, according to the 
Eamayana, the twentyeighth in descent from Ikshvaku, and 
the twentysecond from Trisanku. Vishvamitra is nevertheless 
represented as flourishing contemporaneously with both of 
these princes. The story relates that Ambarisha was engaged in 
performing a sacrifice, when Indra carried away the victim. The 
priest said that this ill-omened event had occurred owing to the 
king’s bad administration; and would call for a great expiation, 
unless a human victim could be produced. After a long search the 
royal rishi (Ambarisha) came upon the Brahman-rishi Richika, 
a descendant of Bhrigu, and asked him to sell one of his sons 
for a victim, at the price of a hundred thousand cows. Richika 
answered that he would not sell his eldest son; and his wife 
added that she would not sell the youngest: “eldest sons,” she 
observed, “being generally the favourites of their fathers, and 
youngest sons of their mothers”. The second son, Sunassepa, then 
said that in that case he regarded himself as the one who was 
to be sold, and desired the king to remove him. The hundred 
thousand cows, with the millions of gold-pieces and heaps of 
jewels, were paid down, and Sunassepa carried away. As they 
were passing through Puskara Sunassepa beheld his maternal 
uncle Vishvamitra who was engaged in austerities there with 
other rishis, threw himself into his arms, and implored his 
assistance, urging his orphan, friendless, and helpless state, 
as claims on the sage’s benevolence. Vishvamitra soothed him; 
and pressed his own sons to offer themselves as victims in 
the room of Sunassepa. This proposition met with no favour 
from Madhushyanda and the other sons of the royal hermit, 
who answered with haughtiness and derision: “How is it that 
thou sacrificest thine own sons, and seekest to rescue those of 
others ? We look upon this as wrong, and like the eating of one’s 
own flesh”. The sage was exceedingly wroth at this disregard 
of his injunction, and doomed his sons to be born in the most 
degraded classes, like Vasishtha’s sons, and to eat dog’s flesh, 
for a thousand years. He then said to Sunassepa: “When thou 
art bound with hallowed cords, decked with a red garland, and 
annointed with ungents, and fastened to the sacrificial post of 
Vishnu, then address thyself to Agni, and sing these two divine 
verses (gathas), at the sacrifice of Ambarisha; then shall thou 
attain the fulfilment (of thy desire)”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


205 


TOUCHABLES V/S UNTOUCHABLES 

Being furnished with the two gathas, Sunassepa proposed at once 
to king Ambarisha that they should set out for their destination. 
When bound at the stake to be immolated, dressed in a red 
garment, “he celebrated the two gods, Indra and his younger 
brother (Vishnu), with the excellent verses. The thousand-eyed 
(Indra) was pleased with the secret hymn, and bestowed long 
life on Sunassepa”. King Ambarisha also received great benefits 
from this sacrifice. Visvamitra meanwhile proceeded with his 
austerities, which he prolonged for a thousand years. 

“At the end of this time the gods came to allot his reward; 
and Brahma announced that he had attained the rank of a rishi, 
thus apparently advancing an additional step. Dissatisfied, as it 
would seem, with this, the sage commenced his task of penance 
anew. After a length of time he beheld the nymph (Apsara) Menka, 
who had come to bathe in the lake of Pushkara. She flashed 
on his view, unequalled in her radiant beauty, like lightning 
in a cloud. He was smitten by her charms, invited her to be 
his companion in his hermitage, and for ten years remained a 
slave to her witchery, to the great prejudice of his austerities. 
At length he became ashamed of this ignoble subjection, and 
full of indignation at what he believed to be a device of the 
gods to disturb his devotion; and, dismissing the nymph with 
gentle accents, he departed for the northern mountains, where 
he practised severe austerities for a thousand years on the banks 
of the Kausiki river. The gods became alarmed at the progress 
he was making, and decided that he should be dignified with 
the appellation of great rishi (maharshi); and Brahma, giving 
effect to the general opinion of the deities, announced that 
he had conferred that rank upon him. Joining his hands and 
bowing his head, Visvamitra replied that he should consider 
himself to have indeed completely subdued his senses, if the 
incomparable title of Brahman-rishi were conferred upon him. 
Brahma informed him in answer, that he had not yet acquired 
the power of perfectly controlling his senses; but should make 
further efforts with that view. The sage then began to put himself 
through a yet more rigorous course of austerities, standing with 
his arms erect, without support, feeding on air, in summer 
exposed to five fires (i.e. one on each of four sides, and the sun 
overhead), in the rainy season remaining unsheltered from the 
wet, and in winter lying on a watery couch night and day. This 
he continued for a thousand years. At last Indra and the other 
deities became greatly distressed at the idea of the merit he 
was storing up, and the power which he was thereby acquiring; 
and the chief of the celestials desired the nymph Rambha 


205 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


206 


206 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to go and bewitch him by her blandishments. She expressed 
great reluctance to expose herself to the wrath of the formidable 
muni, but obeyed the repeated injunction of Indra, who promised 
that he and Kandarpa (the god of love) should stand by her, and 
assumed her most attractive aspect with the view of overcoming 
the sage’s impassability. He, however, suspected this design, 
and becoming greatly incensed, he dommed the nymph by a 
curse to be turned into stone and to continue in that state for a 
thousand years. The curse took effect, and Kandarpa and Indra 
slunk away. In this way, though he resisted the allurements 
of sensual love, he lost the whole fruit of his austerities by 
yielding to anger; and had to begin his work over again. He 
resolved to check his irascibility, to remain silent, not even to 
breathe for hundreds of years; to dry up his body; and to fast 
and stop his breath till he had obtained the coveted character 
of a Brahman. He then left the Himalaya and travelled to the 
east, where he underwent a dreadful exercise, unequalled in 
the whole history of austerities, maintaining silence, according 
to a vow, for a thousand years. At the end of this time he 
had attained to perfection, and although thwarted by many 
obstacles, he remained unmoved by anger. On the expiration 
of this course of austerity, he prepared some food to eat; which 
Indra, coming in the form of a Brahman, begged that he would 
give him. Visvamitra did so, and though he had none left for 
himself, and was obliged to remain fasting, he said nothing to 
the Brahman, on account of his vow of silence. As he continued 
to suspend his breath, smoke issued from his head, to the great 
consternation and distress of the three worlds. The gods, rishis, 
etc., then addressed Brahma: “The great muni Visvamitra has 
been allured and provoked in various ways, but still advances 
in his sanctity. If his wish is not conceded, he will destroy 
the three worlds by the force of his austerity. All the regions 
of the universe are confounded, no light anywhere shines; all 
the oceans are tossed, and the mountains crumble, the earth 
quakes, and the wind blows confusedly. We cannot, O Brahma, 

guarantee that mankind shall not become atheistic 

Before the great and glorious sage of fiery form resolves to 
destroy (everything) let him be propitiated.” The gods, headed 
by Brahma, then addressed Visvamitra: “ Hail Brahman rishi, 
we are gratified by thy austerities; O Kausika, thou hast, 
through their intesity, attained to Brahmanhood. I, O Brahman, 
associated with the Maruts, confer on thee long life. May 
every blessing attend thee; depart wherever thou wilt.’ The 
sage, delighted, made his obeisance to the gods, and said : ‘If I 
have obtained Brahmanhood, and long life, then let the mystic 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


207 


TOUCHABLES V/S UNTOUCHABLES 207 

monosyllable (omkara) and the sacrificial formula (vashatkara) 
and the Vedas recognise me in that capacity. And let Vasishtha, 
the son of Brahma, the most eminent of those who are skilled 
in the Kshattra-veda, and the Brahma-veda (the knowledge of 
the Kshatriya and the Brahmanical disciplines), address me 

similarly.’ Accordingly Vasishtha, being propitiated by the 

gods, became reconciled to Visvamitra, and recognised his claim 

to all the prerogatives of a Brahman rishi Visvamitra, 

too, having attained the Brahmanical rank, paid all honour to 
Vasishtha.” 

The second event has reference to the slaughter of the Brahmins 
by, the Kshatriyas. It is related in the Adiparva of the Mahabharat 
from which the following account is taken: 

There was a king named Kritvirya, by whose liberality the 
Bhrigus, learned in the Vedas, who officiated as his priests, had 
been greatly enriched with corn and money. After he had gone 
to heaven, his descendants were in want of money, and came to 
beg for a supply from the Bhrigus, of whose wealth they were 
aware. Some of the latter hid their money under ground, others 
bestowed it on Brahmans, being afraid of the Kshatriyas, while 
others again gave these last what they wanted. It happened, 
however, that a Kshatriya, while digging the ground, discovered 
some money buried in the house of a Bhrigu. The Kshatriyas then 
assembled and saw this treasure, and, being incensed, slew in 
consequence all the Bhrigus, whom they regarded with contempt, 
down to the children in the womb. The widows, however, fled 
to the Himalaya mountains. One of them concealed her unborn 
child in her thigh. The Kshatriyas, hearing of its existence from 
a Brahmani informant, sought to kill it; but it issued forth from 
its mother’s thigh with lustre, and blinded the persecutors. After 
wandering about bewildered among the mountains for a time, they 
humbly supplicated the mother of the child for the restoration of 
their sight; but she referred them to her wonderful infant Aurva 
into whom the whole Veda, with its veda Vyas had entered, as 
the person who (in requisition of the slaughter of his relatives) 
had robbed them of their eyesight, and who alone could restore 
it. They accordingly had recourse to him, and their eyesight was 
restored. Aurva, however, meditated the destruction of all living 
creatures, in revenge for the slaughter of the Bhrigus, and entered 
on a course of austerities which alarmed both gods, asuras, and 
men; but his progenitors (Pitris) themselves appeared, and sought 
to turn him from his purpose by saying that they had no desire 
to be revenged on the Kshatriyas: “It was not from weakness that 
the devout Bhrigus overlooked the massacre perpetrated by the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


208 


208 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

murderous Kshatriyas. When we became distressed by old age, we 
ourselves desired to be slaughtered by them. The money which was 
buried by some one in a Bhrigu’s house was placed there for the 
purpose of exciting hatred, by those who wished to provoke the 
Kshatriyas. For what had me, who were desiring heaven, to do 
with money ?” They added that they hit upon this device because 
they did not wish to be guilty of suicide, and concluded by calling 
upon Aurva to restrain his wrath; and abstain from the sin he 
was meditating: “Destroy not the Kshatriyas, O son, nor the seven 
worlds. Suppress thy kindled anger which nullifies the power of 
austere-fervour.” Aurva, however, replies that he cannot allow 
his threat to remain unexecuted. His anger, unless wreaked upon 
some other object, will, he says, consume himself. And he argues 
on grounds of justice, expediency, and duty, against the clemency 
which his progenitors recommend. He is, however, persuaded by 
the Pitris to throw the fire of his anger into the sea, where they 
say it will find exercise in assailing the watery element, and in 
this way his threat will be fulfilled.” 

The third event has reference to the slaughter of the Kshatriyas by 
the Brahmins. This story is told in several places in the Mahabharata. 

“The magnificent and mighty Kartavirya, possessing a 
thousand arms, was lord of this whole world, living in Mahishmati. 

This Haihaya of unquestioned valour ruled over the whole 
sea-girt earth, with its oceans and continents”. He obtained 
boons from the muni Dattatreya, a thousand arms whenever he 
should go into battle power to make the conquest of the whole 
earth, a disposition to rule it with justice and the promise of 
instruction from the virtuous in the event of his going astray. 
“Then ascending his chariot glorious as the resplendent sun, he 
exclaimed in the intoxication of his prowess, ‘Who is like me in 
fortitude, courage, fame, heroism, energy, and vigour?’ At the end 
of this speech a bodiless voice in the sky addressed him: ‘Thou 
knowest not, O fool, that a Brahman is better than a Kshatriya. 

It is with the help of the Brahman that the Kshatriya rules 
his subjects.’ Arjuna answers : ‘If I am pleased, I can create, 
or, if displeased, annihilate, living beings; and no Brahman is 
superior to me in act, thought or word. The first proposition is 
that the Brahmans are superior; the second that the Kshatriyas 
are superior; both of these thou hast stated with their grounds, 
but there is a difference between them (in point of force). The 
Brahmans are dependent on the Kshatriyas and not the Kshatriyas 
are beaten up by the Brahmans, who wait upon them, and 
only make the Vedas a pretence. Justice, the protection of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


209 


TOUCHABLES V/S UNTOUCHABLES 209 

people, has its seat in the Kshatriyas. From them the Brahmans 
derived their livelihood; how then can the latter be superior? 

I always keep in subjection to myself those Brahmans, the 
chief of all beings, who subsist on alms, and who have a high 
opinion of themselves. For truth was spoken by that female the 
Gayatri in the sky. I shall subdue all those unruly Brahmans 
clad in hides. No one in the three worlds, god or man, can 
hurl me from my royal authority; wherefore I am superior to 
any Brahman. Now shall I turn the world in which Brahmans 
have the upper hand into a place where Kshatriyas shall have 
the upper hand; for no one dares to encounter my force in 
battle.’ Hearing this speech of Arjuna, the female roving in the 
night became alarmed. Then Vayu hovering in the air, said to 
Arjuna: ‘Abandon this sinful disposition, and do obeisance to 
the Brahmans. If thou shalt do them wrong, thy kingdom shall 
be convulsed. They will subdue thee: those powerful men will 
humble thee, and expel thee from thy country.’ The king asks 
him, ‘Who art thou?’ Vayu replies, ‘I am Vayu, the messenger of 
the gods, and tell thee what is for thy benefit.’ Arjuna rejoins, 

‘Oh, thou displayest today a great warmth of devotion to the 
Brahmans. But say that a Brahman is like (any other) earth- 
born creature.” 

This king came into conflict with Parasuram the son of a Brahman 
sage Jamadagni. The history of this conflict is as follows : 

“There lived a king of Kanyakubja, called Gadhi, who had 
a daughter named Satyavati. The marriage of this princess 
to the rishi Richika, and the birth of Jamadagni, are then 
told in nearly the same way as above narrated. Jamadagni 
and Satyavati had five sons, the youngest of whom was the 
redoubtable Parasuram. By his father’s command he kills his 
mother (who, by the indulgence of impure desire, had fallen 
from her previous sanctity), after the four elder sons had refused 
this matricidal offence, and had in consequence been deprived of 
reason by their father’s curse. At Parasuram’s desire, however, 
his mother is restored by his father to life, and his brothers to 
reason; and he himself is absolved from all the guilt of murder; 
and obtains the boon of invincibility and long life from his 
father. His history now begins to be connected with that of king 
Arjuna (or Kartavirya). The latter had come to Jamadagni’s 
hermitage, and had been respectfully received by his wife; but 
he had requited this honour by carrying away by force the calf 
of the sage’s sacrificial cow, and breaking down his lofty trees. 

On being informed of this violence, Parasurama was filled with 
indignation, attacked Arjuna. cut off his thousand arms, and slew 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


210 


210 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

him. Arjuna’s sons, in return, slew the peaceful sage Jamadagni, 
in the absence of Parasurama.” 

“Rama, after performing, on his return, his father’s funeral 
obsequies, vowed to destroy the whole Kshatriya race; and executed 
his threat by killing first Arjuna’s sons and their followers. 
Twentyone times did he sweep away all the Kshatriyas from the 
earth, and formed five lakes of blood in Samantapanchaka; in 
which he satiated the manes of the Bhrigus, and beheld face to 
face (his grand-father), Richika, who addressed himself to Rama. 

The latter gratified Indra by offering to him a grand sacrifice, 
and gave the earth to the officiating priests. He bestowed also 
a golden altar, ten fathoms long and nine high, on the mighty 
Kasyapa. This, by his permission, the Brahmans divided among 
themselves, deriving thence the name of Khandavavanas. Having 
given away the earth to Kasyapa, Parasurama himself dwells 
on the mountain Mahendra. Thus did enmity arise between him 
and Kshatriyas, and thus was the earth conquered by Rama of 
boundless might.” 

The Kshatriyas who were slain by Parasuram are described in the 
Dronaparvan of the Mahabharat as of various provinces, viz., Kasmiras, 
Darads, Kuntis, Kshudrakas, Malavas, Angas, Vangas, Kalingas, Videhas, 
Tamraliptakas, Marttikavatas, Sivis and other Rajanyas. 

The means by which the Kshattriya race was restored is also told 
as part of this story of annihilation of the Kshatriyas by the Brahmins. 
It is said: 

“Having one and twenty times swept away all the Kshatriyas 
from the earth, the son of Jamadagni engaged in austerities on 
Mahendra the most excellent of mountains. After he had cleared 
the world of Kshatriyas, their widows came to the Brahmans, 
praying for offspring. The religious Brahmans, free from any 
impulse of lust, cohabited at the proper seasons with these women, 
who in consequence became pregnant, and brought forth valiant 
Kshatriya boys and girls, to continue the Kshatriya stock. Thus 
was the Kshatriya race virtuously begotten by Brahmans on 
Kshatriya women, and became multiplied and long-lived. Thence 
there arose four castes inferior to the Brahmans.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


211 


Chapter 19 

THE CURSE OF CASTE 


As I have said in the first Essay 1 there cannot be a caste in the single 
number. Caste can exist only in the plural number. Caste to be real can 
exist only by disintegrating a group. The genius of caste is to divide and 
to disintegrate. It is also the curse of caste. Few, however, realize how 
great is this curse of caste. It is therefore necessary to illustrate the 
vastness of this curse by reference to the disintegration brought about 
by caste. It is impossible to deal with each caste to show the evolution 
of its disintegration. One must content himself with presenting the caste 
history of one caste. I take the case of the Brahmins who have been the 
originators and upholders of caste to show how they themselves have 
been overwhelmed by what I call the curse of caste. The Brahmins of 
India are divided into two distinct fraternities. One fraternity is called 
the Dra vidas and the other fraternity is called the Gaudas. 

It must not, however, be supposed that the Dravidas and Gaudas 
are single homogeneous unit. They are divided and sub-divided in units 
so numerous that it is difficult to imagine their numbers unless one has 
actual lists of their sub-divisions before his eye. In the following pages 
an attempt is made to give the list of castes and sub-castes into which 
each sub-division of the fraternity is divided. 

I 

THE DRAVIDA BRAHMINS 

The fraternity of Dravidas consists of five sub-divisions who are 
collectively styled the Panch Dravidas. The five sub-divisions are called: 

(1) The Maharashtrians 

(2) The Andhras 

(3) The Dravidians (proper) 

(4) The Karnatakas 

(5) The Gurjaras 

1 This has a reference to ‘ The Castes in India’, published in Vol. I of this series. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


212 


212 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

We may next proceed to note the castes and sub-castes into which 
each of these sub-divisions of the Panch Dra vidas have disintegrated. 

I. THE MAHARASHTRA BRAHMINS 

The Maharashtra Brahmins have among them the following castes 
and sub -castes: 

(1) The Deshasthas, (2) The Konkanasthas, (3) The Karhadas, 
(4) The Kanvas, (5) The Madhyandinas, (6) The Padhyas, 
(7) The Devarukhas, (8) The Palashas, (9) The Kirvantas, (10) The 
Tirgulas, (11) The Javalas, (12) The Abhiras, (13) The Savashas, 
(14) Kastas, (15) The Kunda Golakas, (16) The Randa Golakas, 
(17) The Brahmana-Jais, (18) The Soparas, (19) The Khistis, 
(20) The Huseinis, (21) The Kalankis, (22) The Maitrayaniyas, 
(23) The Varadis-Madhyandin-Yajur-Vedi, (24) The Varadis- 
Madhyandin-Rig Vedi, (25) The Jhade. 

The Shenvis are further divided into nine sub-castes called — 

(26) Narvankar, (27) Keloskar, (28) Bardeshkar, 

(29) Kudaldeshkar, (30) Pednekar, (31) Bhalavelekar, 

(32) Kushasthali, (33) Khadape and (34) Khajule. 

2. THE ANDHRA BRAHMINS 

The following is the list of castes and sub -castes which make up the 
Andhra Brahmins — 

(1) The Varnasalus, (2) The Kamarukubi, (3) The Karanakamulu, 

(4) The Madhyandians, (5) The Tailangas, (6) The Murakanadus, 
(7) The Aradhyas, (8) The Yajnavalkyas, (9) The Kasaranadu, 
(10) The Velandus, (11) The Venginadus, (12) The Vedinadus, 
(13) The Samavedis, (14) The Ramanujis, (15) The Madhavacharis, 
(16) The Niyogis. 

3. THE TAMIL BRAHMINS 

They consist of the following castes — 

(1) The Rig-Vedis, (2) The Krishna Yajur-Vedis, (3) The Shukla 
Yajur-Vedis — Madhyandinas, (4) The Shukla Yajur-Vedis-Kanvas, 

(5) The Sama Vedis, (6) The Atharva, (9) The Vaishnavas, 
(10) The Vira Vaishnavas, (11) The Shri-Vaishnavas, (12) The 
Bhagvatas, (13) The Shaktas. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


213 


THE CURSE OF CASTE 213 

4. THE KARNATIK BRAHMINS 

They include the following castes — 

(1) The Rig Vedis, (2) The Krishna Yajur-Vedis, (3) The Shukla 
Yajur-Vedis Madhyandinas, (4) The Shukla Yajur-Vedis Kanvas, 
(5) The Sama Vedis, (6) The Kume Brahmins and (7) The Nagara 
Brahmins. 

5. THE GURJARA BRAHMINS 

The list of castes which compose the Gurjara Brahmins is as follows: 

I. The Andichya Brahmins. They are divided into the following 
sub -castes: 

(1) Siddhpura Andichya, (2) Sihor Andichya, (3) Tolkiya Andhichya, 
(4) Kunbigor, (5) Inochigor, (6) Darjigor, (7) Grandhrapagor, 
(8) Koligor, (9) Marwadi Andichya, (10) Kachhi Andichya, (11) 
Vagdiya Andichya. 

II. The Nagar Brahmins. The following are the sub-castes of the 
Nagar Brahmins: 

(12) The Vadanagar Brahmins, (13) The Vishalnagar Brahmins, 
(14) The Sathodra Brahmins, (15) The Prashnoras, (16) The 
Krishnoras, (17) The Chitrodas, (18) The Baradas. 

There are also three other divisions among the Nagar Brahmins. 

They are called — 

(19) Gujarathi Nagars, (20) Sorathi Nagars and (21) Nagars of 
other Towns. 

III. The Girnar Brahmins. They are divided among the following 
castes: 

(22) The Junagadhya Girnars, (23) The Chorvada Girnars, 

(24) The Ajakiyas. 

IV. The Mevadas Brahmins. They are distributed among the following 
castes: 

(25) The Bhata Mevadas, (26) The Trivadi Mevadas, (27) The 
Charosi Mevadas. 

V. The Deshavala Brahmins. They have one sub-caste which is called: 
(46) The Deshavala Brahman Surati. 

VI. The Rayakavala Brahmins. They are divided into two sub-castes : 
(47) The Navas (new ones) and (48) The Mothas (old ones). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


214 


214 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

VII. The Khedvala Brahmins. They are divided into five sub-castes : 

(49) The Khedvala Bajas, (50) The Khedvala Bhitaras, (51) The 
Khedva Bajas, (52) The Khedva Bhitaras. 

VIII. The Modha Brahmins. They are divided into eleven sub-castes : 

(53) The Trivedi Modhas, (54) The Chaturvedi Modhas, (55) The 
Agihans Modhas, (56) The Tripal Modhas, (57) The Khijadiya 
Sanvana Modhas, (58) The Ekadashdhra Modhas, (59) The 
Tandulotha Modhas, (60) The Utanjaliya Modhas, (61) The 
Jethimal Modhas, (62) The Chaturvedi Dhinoja Modhas, (63) The 
Dhinoja Modhas. 

IX. The Shrimali Brahmins. The Shrimali Brahmins are divided into 
the following castes: 

(64) The Marwadi Shrimali, (65) The Mevadi Shrimali, (66) The 
Kachhi Shrimali, (67) The Kathiavadi Shrimali, (68) The Gujarathi 
Shrimali. 

The Gujarathi Shrimali are further sub-divided into — 

(69) Ahamadabadi Shrimali, (70) Surati Shrimali, (71) Ghoghari 
Shrimali and (72) The Khambhati Shrimali. The Khambhati 
Shrimali are again sub-divided into — 

(73) Yajurvedi Khambhati Shrimali, (74) Samavedi Khambhati 
Shrimali. 

X. The Chovisha Brahmins. They are divided into two sub-castes : 
(75) Mota (Great ones), (76) Lahana (small ones). 

XI. The Sarasvata Brahmins. They are divided into two sub-castes : 
(77) Sorathiya Sarasvata, (78) Sindhava Sarasvata. 

XII. The following is the list of castes of Gujaratha Brahmins which 
have not developed sub-castes: 

(79) The Sachora Brahmins, (80) The Udambara Brahmins, 
(81) The Narsipara Brahmins, (82) The Valadra Brahmins, 
(83) The Pangora Brahmins, (84) The Nandodra Brahmins, 
(85) The Vayada Brahmins, (86) The Tamil (or Dradvida) 
Brahmins, (87) The Rodhavala Brahmins, (88) The Padmivala 
Brahmins, (89) The Gomativala Brahmins, (90) The Itavala 
Brahmins, (91) The Medhatavala Brahmins, (92) The Gayavala 
Brahmins, (93) The Agastyavala Brahmins, (94) The Pretavala 
Brahmins, (95) The Unevala Brahmins, (96) The Rajavala 
Brahmins, (97) The Kanojiya Brahmins, (98) The Sarvariya 
Brahmins, (99) The Kanoliya Brahmins, (100) The Kharkheliya 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


215 


THE CURSE OF CASTE 215 

Brahmins, (101) The Parvaliaya Brahmins, (102) The Sorathiya 
Brahmins, (103) The Tangamadiya Brahmins, (104) The 
Sanodiya Brahmins, (105) The Motala Brahmins, (106) The 
Jhalora Brahmins, (107) The Rayapula Brahmins, (108) The 
Kapila Brahmins, (109) The Akshayamangala Brahmins, 
(110) The Gugli Brahmins, (111) The Napala Brahmins, 

(112) The Anavala Brahmins, (113) The Valmika Brahmins, 

(114) The Kalinga Brahmins, (115) The Tailinga Brahmins, 

(116) The Bhargava Brahmins, (117) The Malavi, (118) The 
Banduan Brahmins, (119) The Bharathana Brahmins, (120) The 
Pushkarana Brahmins, (121) The Khadayata Brahmins, 
(122) The Maru Brahmins, (123) The Dahima Brahmins, 
(124) The Chovisa Brahmins, (125) The Jambu Brahmins, 
(126) The Maratha Brahmins, (127) The Dadhicha Brahmins, 
(128) The Lalata Brahmins, (129) The Valuta Brahmins, 
(130) The Borshidha Brahmins, (131) The Golavala Brahmins, 
(132) The Prayagvala Brahmins, (133) The Nayakvala Brahmins, 
(134) The Utkala Brahmins, (135) The Pallivala Brahmins, 
(136) The Mathura Brahmins, (137) The Maithila Brahmins, 
(138) The Kulabha Brahmins, (139) The Bedua Brahmins, 
(140) The Ravavala Brahmins, (141) The Dashahara Brahmins, 
(142) The Karnatika Brahmins, (143) The Talajiya Brahmins, 
(144) The Parashariya Brahmins, (145) The Abhira Brahmins, 
(146) The Kundu Brahmins, (147) The Hirayajiya Brahmins, 
(148) The Mastava Brahmins, (149) The Sthitisha Brahmins, 
(150) The Predatvala Brahmins, (151) The Rampura Brahmins, 
(152) The Jila Brahmins, (153) The Tilotya Brahmins, (154) The 
Durmala Brahmins, (155) The Kodva Brahmins, (156) The 
Hanushuna Brahmins, (157) The Shevada Brahmins, (158) The 
Titraga Brahmins, (159) The Basuladas Brahmins, (160) The 
Magmarya Brahmins, (161) The Rayathala Brahmins, (162) The 
Chapila Brahmins, (163) The Baradas Brahmins, (164) The 
Bhukaniya Brahmins, (165) The Garoda Brahmins, (166) The 
Taporana Brahmins. 


II 

THE GAUDA BRAHMINS 

Like the Dravida Brahmins the Gauda Brahmins also consist of a 
fraternity of five different groups of Brahmins. These five groups are 
known as: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


216 


216 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(1) The Sarasvata Brahmins, (2) The Kanyakubja Brahmins, 
(3) The Gauda Brahmins, (4) The Utkala Brahmins, (5) The 
Maithila Brahmins. 

An inquiry into the internal structure of each of these five groups 
of Panch Gaudas reveals the same condition as is found in the case of 
the five groups which form the fraternity of Panch Dravidas. The only 
question is whether the internal divisions and sub-divisions are fewer 
or larger than are found among the Panch Dravidas. For this purpose 
it is better to take each group separately. 

THE SARASVATA BRAHMINS 

The Sarasvata Brahmins fall into three territorial sections: 

(1) The Sarasvatas of the Punjab, (2) The Sarasvatas of Kashmir 
and (3) The Sarasvatas of Sindh. 

1. THE SARASVATAS OF PUNJAB 

There are three sub-sections of the Sarasvatas of the Punjab: 

(A) Sarasvatas of the districts of Lahore, Amritsar, Batala, 
Gurdaspur, Jalandar, Multan, Jhang and Shahpur. 

They are again divided into High Caste and Low Caste. 

HIGH CASTES 

(1) Navale, (2) Chuni, (3) Ravade, (4) Sarvaliye, (5) Pandit, 
(6) Tikhe, (7) Jhingan, (8) Kumadiye, (9) Jetle, (10) Mohle or 
Mole, (11) Tikhe-A’nde, (12) Jhingan-Pingan, (13) jetli-Petli, (14) 
Kumadiye-Lumadiye, (15) Mohle-Bohle, (16) Bage, (17) Kapuriye, 
(18) Bhaturiye, (19) Maliye, (20) Kaliye, (21) Sanda, (22) Pathak, 
(23) Rural, (24) Bharadwaji, (25) Joshi, (26) Shori, (27) Tiwadi, 
(28) Marud, (29) Datta, (30) Mujhal, (31) Chhibar, (32) Bali, (33) 
Mohana, (34) Lava, (35) Vaidya, (36) Prabhakar, (37) Shame- 
Potre, (38) Bhoja-Potre, (39) Singhe-Potre, (40) Vatte-Potre, (41) 
Dhannan-Potre, (42) Dravade, (43) Gaindhar, (44) Takht Laladi, 
(45) Shama Dasi, (46) Setpal (or Shetpal), (47) Pushrat, (48) 
Bharadvaji, (49) Katpale, (50) Ghotke, (51) Pukarne. 

LOWER CLASSES 

(52) Diddi, (53) Shridhara, (54) Vinayaka, (55) Majju, (56) 
Khindariye, (57) Harad, (58) Prabhakar, (59) Vasudeva, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


217 


THE CURSE OF CASTE 217 

(60) Parashara, (61) Mohana, (62) Panjan, (63) Tivara, 
(64) Kapala, (65) Bharkhari, (66) Sodhi, (67) Kaijar, (68) 
Sangad, (69) Bharadvaji, (70) Nage, (71) Makavar, (72) 
Vashishtha, (73) Dangaval, (74) Jalap, (75) Tripane, (76) 
Bharathe, (77) Bansale, (78) Gangahar, (79) Jotashi, (80) 
Rikhi (or Rishi), (81) Mandar, (82) Brahmi, (83) Tejpal, (84) 
Pal, (85) Rupal, (86) Lakhanpal, (87) Ratanpal, (88) Shetpal, 
(89) Bhinde, (90) Dhami, (91) Chanan, (92) Randeha, (93) 
Bhuta, (94) Rati, (95) Kundi, (96) Hasadhir, (97) Punj, (98) 
Sandhi, (99) Bahoye, (100) Virad, (101) Kaland, (102) Suran, 
(103) Sudan, (104) Ojhe, (105) Bramha-Sukul, (106) Hariye, 
(107) Gajesu, (108) Bhanot, (109) Tinuni, (110) Jalli, (111) 
Tole, (112) Jalap, (113) Chitchot, (114) Padhe or Pandhe, 
(115) Marud, (116) Laladiye, (117) Tote, (118) Kusarit, (119) 
Ramtal, (120) Kapale, (121) Masodare, (122) Ratniye, (123) 
Chandan, (124) Churavan, (125) Mandahar, (126) Madhare, 
(127) Lakarphar, (128) Kund, (129) Kardam, (130) Dhande, 
(131) Sahajpal, (132) Pabhi, (133) Rati, (134) Jaitke, (135) 
Daidriye, (136) Bhatare, (137) Kali, (138) Jalpot, (139) Maitra, 
(140) Sankhatre, (141) Ludra, (142) Vyasa, (143) Paltu, (144) 
Kirar, (145) Puje, (146) Isar, (147) Latta, (148) Dhami, (149) 
Kalhan, (150) Madarkhamb, (151) Bedesar. (152) Salvahan, 
(153) Dhande, (154) Marud, 0155) Bature, (156) Joti, (157) 
Soyari, (158) Tejpal, (159) Kuralpal, (160) Kates, (161) 
Jalap, (162) Tinmani, (163) Tanganivate, (164) Jalpot, (165) 
Pattu, (166) Jasrava, (167) Jayachand, (168) Sanwal, (169) 
Agnihotri, (170) Agraphakka, (171) Ruthade, (172) Bhaji, (173) 
Kuchhi, (174) Saili, (175) Bhambi, (176) Medu, (177) Mehad, 
(178) Yamye, (179) Sangar, (180) Sang, (181) Nehar, (182) 
Chakpaliye, (183) Bijraye, (184) Narad, (185) Kutwal, (186) 
Kotpal, (187) Nabh, (188) Nad, (189) Parenje, (190) Kheti, (191) 
A’ri, (192) Chavhe, (193) Bibde, (194) Bandu, (195) Machhu, 
(196) Sundar, (197) Karadage, (198) Chhibbe, (199) Sadhi, (200) 
Tallan, (201) Karddam, (202) Jhaman, (203) Rangade, (204) 
Bhog, (205) Pande, (206) Gande, (207) Pante, (208) Gandhe, 
(209) Dhinde, (210) Tagale, (211) Dagale, (212) Lahad, (213) 
Tad, (214) Kayi, (215) Ludh, (216) Gandar, (217) Mahe, (218) 
Saili, (219) Bhagi, (220) Pande, (221) Pipar, (222) Jathee. 

(B) Sarasvata Brahamins of Kangada and the adjacent Hill 
Country. These too are divided into High Class and Low 
Class. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


218 


218 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 
HIGH CASTES 

(1) Osdi, (2) Pandit Kashmiri, (3) Sotri, (4) Vedve, (5) Naga, (6) 
Dikshit, (7) Misri Kashmiri, (8) Madihatu, (9) Panchkarn, (10) 
Raine, (11) Kurudu, (12) A’Chariye. 

LOWER CLASSES 

(13) Chithu, (14) Panyalu, (15) Dumbu, (16) Dehaidu, 
(17) Rukhe, (18) Pambar, (19) Gutre, (20) Dyabhudu, (21) Maite, 

(22) Prot (Purohita) Jadtotrotiye, (23) Visht Prot, (24) Padhe Saroj, 
(25) Padhe Khajure, (26) Padhe Mahite, (27) Khajure, 
(28) Chhutwan, (29) Bhanwal, (30) Rambe, (31) Mangrudiye, 

(32) Khurvadh, (33) Galvadh, (34) Dangmar, (35) Chalivale. 

(C) Sarasvata Brahmins of Dattarpur, Hoshyarpur and the adjacent 
Country. 

These are also divided into High Class and Low Class. 

I. HIGH CASTES 

(1) Dogre, (2) Sarmayi, (3) Dube, (4) Lakhanapal, (5) Padhe 
Dholbalvaiya, (6) Padhe Ghohasniye, (7) Padhe Dadiye, (8) Padhe 
Khindadiya, (9) Khajurive. 

II. LOWER CLASSES 

(10) Kapahatiye, (ll)Bharadhiyal, (12) Chaprohiye, (13) Makade, 

(14) Kutallidiye, (15) Sarad, (16) Dagadu, (17) Vantade, (18) 
Muchle, (19) Sammol, (20) Dhose, (21) Bhatol, (22) Rajohad, 

(23) Thanik, (24) Panyal, (25) Chibbe, (26) Madote, (27) Misar, 
(28) Chhakotar, (29) Jalreiye, (30) Lahad, (31) Sel, (32) Bhasul, 

(33) Pandit, (34) Changhial, (35) Lath, (36) Sand, (37) Lai, (38) 
Gadottare, (39) Chirnol, (40) Badhle, (41) Shridhar, (42) Patdu, (43) 
Juwal, (44) Maite, (45) Kakliye, (46) Tak, (47) Jhol, (48) Bhadoe, 
(49) Tandik, (50) Jhummutiyar, (51) A’l,’ (52) Mirat, (53) Mukati, 
(54) Dalchallie, (55) Bhatohaye, (56) Tyahaye, (57) Bhatare. 

2. THE SARASVATAS OF KASHMIR 

There are two sub-sections of the Sarasvatas of Kashmir. 

(A) Sarasvata Brahamans of Jammu, Jasrota and the neighbouring 
Hill Country. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


219 


THE CURSE OF CASTE 219 

They are divided into three classes, High, Middle and Low. 

I. HIGH CASTES 

(1) Amgotre, (2) Thappe, (3) Dube, (4) Sapoliye Padhe, (5) 
Badiyal, (6) Kesar, (7) Nadh, (8) Khajure Prahot, (9) Jamval 
Pandit, (10) Vaidya, (11) Lava, (12) Chibar, (13) aliye, (14) 
Mohan, (15) Bambhaval. 

II. MIDDLE CASTES 

(16) Raine, (17) Satotre, (18) Katotre, (19) Lalotre, 
(20) Bhangotre, (21) Samnotre, (22) Kashmiri Pandit, 
(23) Pandhotre, (24) Vilhanoch, (25) Badu, (26) Kernaye Pandit, 
(27) Danal Padhe, (28) Mahite, (29) Sudhraliye, (30) Bhatiad, 
(31) Puroch, (32) Adhotre, (33) Mishra, (34) Parashara, 
(35) Bavagotre, (36) Mansotre, (37) Sudathiye. 

III. LOWER CLASSES 

(38) Sudan, (39) Sukhe, (40) Bhure, (41) Chandan, (42) Jalotre, 
(43) Nabhotre, (44) Khadotre, (45) Sagdol, (46) Bhuriye, 
(47) Baganachhal, (48) Rajuliye, (49) Sangde, (50) Munde, 
(51) Surnachal, (52) Ladhanjan, (53) Jakhotre, (54) Lakhanpal, 
(55) Gauda Purohita, (56) Shashgotre, (57) Khanotre, 
(58) Garoch, (59) Marotre, (60) Upadhe, (61) Khindhaiye Padhe, 
(62) Kalandari, (63) Jarad, (64) Udihal, (65) Ghode, 
(66) Basnotre, (67) Barat, (68) Chargat, (69) Lavanthe, 
(70) Bharangol, (71) Jaranghal, (72) Guhaliye, (73) Dhariancha, 
(74) Pindhad, (75) Rajuniye, (76) Badakulive, (77) Sirkhandiye, 
(78) Kirpad, (79) Balli, (80) Salurn, (81) Ratanpal, (82) Banotre, 
(83) Yantradhari, (84) Dadorich, (85) Bhaloch, (86) Chhachhiale, 
(87) Jhangotre, (88) Magdol, (89) Phaunphan, (90) Saroch, 
(91) Gudde, (92) Kirle, (93) Mansotre, (94) Thammotre, 
(95) Thanmath, (96) Bramiye, (97) Kundan, 
(98) Gokuliye Gosain, (99) Chakotre, (100) Rod, 
(101) Bargotre, (102) Kavde, (103) Magdiyaliye, 
(104) Mathar, (105) Mahijiye, (106) Thakure Purohita, 
(107) Galhal, (108) Cham, (109) Rod, (110) Labhotre, 
(111) Redathiye, (112) Patal, (113) Kamaniye, (114) Gandhargal, 
(115) Prithvipal, (116) Madhotre, (117) Kambo, (118) Sarmayi, 
(119) Bachhal, (120) Makhotre, (121) Jad, (122) Batialiye, 
(123) Kudidab, (124) Jambe, (125) Karanathiye, (126) Suthade, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


220 


220 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(127) Sigad, (128) Garadiye, (129) Machhar, (130) Baghotre, 
(131) Sainhasan, (132) Utriyal, (133) Suhandiye, 
(134) Jhindhad, (135) Battal, (136) Bhainkhare, 
(137) Bisgotre, (138) Jhalu, (139) Dabb, (140) Bhuta, (141) Kathialu, 
(142) Paladhu, (143) Paladhu, (144) Jakhotre, (145) Pange, 
(146) Solhe, (147) Suguniye, (148) Sanhoch, (149) Duhal, 
(150) Bando, (151) Kanungo, (152) Jhavdu, (153) Jhaphadu, 
(154) Kaliye, (155) Khaphankho. 

(B) THE SARASVATAS OF KASHMIR 1 

The following is a list of Kashmiri Brahmins. 

(1) Kaul, (2) Raj dan, (3) Guriti, (4) Jitish, (5) Dar, (6) Trakari, 
(7) Mujhi, (8) Munshi, (9) Butal, (10) Javi, (11) Bajai, (12) Rei, 
(13) Hundo, (14) Dipti, (15) Chhichvali, (16) Rugi, (17) Kail, 
(18) Sum, (19) Hanji, (20) Hastivali, (21) Mutu, (22) Tikku, 
(23) Gais, (24) Gadi, (25) Brari, (26) Ganj, (27) Vangan, 
(28) Vagana, (29) Bhut, (30) Bhairava, (31) Madan, 
(32) Dina, (33) Shargal, (34) Hakchar, (35) Hak, (36) Kukar, 
(37) Chhatari, (38) Saunpuri, (39) Matti, (40) Khush, 
(41) Shakdar, (42) Vaishnava, (43) Kotar, (44) Kak, 
(45) Kachari, (46) Tote, (47) Saraph, (48) Gurah, 
(49) Thanthar, (50) Khar, (51) Thaur, (52) Teng, (53) 
Saiyad, (54) Trupuraya, (55) Muthi, (56) Saphai, (57) Bhan, 
(58) Vanya, (59) Garial, (60) Thapal, (61) Nauri, 

(62) Masaldan, (63) Mushran, (64) Turki, (65) Photedar, 
(66) Kharu, (67) Karbangi, (68) Bhath, (69) Kichilu, 

(70) Chhan, (71) Mukdam, (72) Khapari, (73) Bulaki, 

(74) Kar, (75) Jelali, (76) Saphayu, (77) Batphali, (78) Hukhi, 
(79) Kukpari, (80) Kali, (81) Jari, (82) Ganj, (83) Kim, 
(84) Mundi, (85) Jangal, (86) Jati, (87) Rakhyas, 

(88) Bakayi, (89) Geri, (90) Gari, (91) Kali, (92) Panji, (93) Bangi, 
(94) Sahib, (95) Belab, (96) Rayi, (97) Galikarap, (98) Chan, 
(99) Kababi, (100) Yachh, (101) Jalpuri, (102) Navashahari, 
(103) Kisi, (104) Dhusi, (105) Gamkhar, (106) Tholal, (107) Pista, 
(108) Badam, (109) Trachhal, (110) Nadir, (111) Lidarigari, 
(112) Pyal, (113) Kabi, (114) Chhatri, (115) Vanti, (116) Vatlilu, 
(117) Khari, (118) Vas, (119) i ati, (120) Sabanj, (121) Dandi, 
(122) Raval, (123) Misari, (124) Sibbi, (125) Singari, (126) Mirje, 


1 There is a difference of opinion about the Kashmir Brahamins being Sarasvatas. Some 
say they are. Others say they are not. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


221 


THE CURSE OF CASTE 221 

(127) Mail (128) Variki, (129) Jan, (130) Lutari, (131) Parim, 
(132) Hali, (133) Nakaib, (134) Main, (135) Ambaradar, (136) Ukhal, 
(137) Kanth, (138) Bali, (139) Jangali, (140) Duli, (141) Parava, 
(142) Harkar, (143) Gagar, (144) Pandit, (145) Jari, (146) Langi, 
(147) Mukki, (148) Bihi, (149) Padaur, (150) Pade, (151) Jand, 
(152) Teng, (153) Tund, (154) Drabi, (155) Dral, (156) Phambbi, 
(157) Sajavul, (158) Bakhshi, (159) Ugra, (160) Nichvi, (161) Pathan, 
(162) Vichari, (163) Unth, (164) Kuchari, (165) Shal, (166) Babi, 
(167) Makhani, (168) Labari, (169) Khanya, (170) Khanyakati, 
(171) Shah, (172) Pir, (173) Khurdi, (174) Khunki, (175) Kalposh, 
(176) Pishan, (177) Bishan, (178) Bui, (179) Choki, (180) Chak, 
(181) Rai, (182) Priti, (183) Pati, (184) Kichili, (185) Kahi, 
(186) Jiji, (187) Kilmak, (188) Salman, (189) Kadalbaju, (190) Kandahari, 
(191) Bali, (192) Manati, (193) Bankhan, (194) Hakim, 
(195) Garib, (196) Mandal, (197) Manjaha, (198) Shair, (199) Nun, 
(200) Teli, (201) Khalasi, (202) Chandra, (203) Gadir, (204) Jarabi, 
(205) Sihari, (206) Kalvit, (207) Nagari, (208) Mungvuch, (209) Khaibari, 
(210) Kulli, (211) Kabi, (212) Khosa, (213) Durani, (214) Tuli, 
(215) Garib, (216) Gadi, (217) Jati, (218) Rakhsas, (219) Harkar, 
(220) Grad, (221) Vagari, etc. etc. 

3. THE SARASVATAS OF SINDH 

The Sarasvatas of Sindh are sub-divided as follows: 

(1) Shikarpuris, (2) Barovis, (3) Ravanjahis, (4) Shetpalas and (5) 
Kuvachandas, (6) Pokharana. 

II. THE KANYAKUBJA BRAHMINS 

The Kanuakubjas take their name from the town Kanoj which was 

the capital of the Empire of They are also called Kanoujas. There 

are two denominations of the Kanyakubja Brahamins. One is called 
the Sarvariyas and the other is called the Kanyakubjas. The Sarvariyas 
got their name from the ancient river Saryu to the east of which they 
are principally found. They are a provincial offset from the Kanaujas, 
with whom they do not now intermarry. The sub-divisions among the 
Sarvariyas are generally the same as those found among the Kanaujas. 
It is therefore enough to detail the sub-divisions among the Kanaujas. 

There are ten divisions of the Kanyakubja Brahmins: 

(1) The Mishra, (2) The Shuklas, (3) The Tivaris, (4) The Dubes, (5) 
The Pathaks. (6) The Pande, (7) The Upadhya, (8) The Chaubes, 
(9) The Dikshitas, (10) The Vajapeyis. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


222 


222 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Each of these sub-divisions has many sub-divisions. They are 
mentioned below: 


1. THE MISHRAS 

The Mishras consist of the following sections: 

(1) The Madhbani, (2) The Champaran, (3) The Patlal or Patlayala, 
(4) The Ratanvala, (5) The Bandol, (6) The Matol or Matevala, 

(7) The Katariya of the same Veda, (8) The Nagariya of the Vatsa 
Gotra, (9) The Payasi of the Vatsa Gotra, (10) The Gana, (11) 
The Teunta or the Tevanta, (12) The Marjani, (13) The Gurha, 
(14) The Markara, (15) The Jignya, (16) The Parayana, (17) 
The Pepara, (18) The Aterva or A tharva, (19) The Hathepara, 

(20) The Suganti, (21) The Kheta, (22) The Grambasi, (23) The 
Birha, (24) The Kausi, (25) The Kevati, (26) The Raisi, (27) The 
Bhahajiya, (28) The Belva, (29) The Usraina, (30) The Kodiya, 
(31) The Tavakpuri, (32) The Jimalpuri, (33) The Shringarpuri, 
(34) The Sitapuri, (35) The Putavha, (36) The Sirajpuri, (37) 
The Bhampuri, (38) The Terka, (39) The Dudhagaumi, (40) The 
Ratnapuri, (41) The Sunhanla. 

2. THE SHUKLAS 

The Shuklas consist of the following sections: 

(I) The Khakhayijkhor named from two villages, (2) The Mamkhor 
named from two villages, (3) The Tipthi, (4) The Bhedi, (5) The 
Bakaruva, (6) The Kanjahi, (7) The Khandail, (8) The Bela, 
(9) The Change the Avasthi, (10) The Tevarasi Parbhakar, 

(II) The Mehuliyar, (12) The Kharbahiya, (13) The Chanda, 
(14) The Grga, (15) The Gautami, (16) The Parasa, (17) The Tara, 
(18) The Barikhpuri, (19) The Karyava, (20) The Ajmadgadhya, 

(21) The Pichaura, (22) The Masauvas, (23) The Sonthianva, 
(24) The Aukin, (25) The Bir, (26) The Gopinath. 

3. THE TIVARIS 

The Tivaris consist of the following sections: 

(1) The Lonakhar, (2) The Lonapar, (3) The Munjauna, (4) The 
Mangraich, (5) The Jhunadiya, (6) The Sohgaura, (7) The Tara, 

(8) The Gorakhpuriya, (9) The Daurava, (10) Pendi, (11) The 
Sirjam, (12) The Dhatura, (13) The Panauli, (14) The Nadauli or 
Tandauli, (15) The Burhiyabari, (16) The Gurauli, (17) The Jogiya, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


223 


THE CURSE OF CASTE 223 

(18) The Dikshita, (19) The Sonaura, (20) The Agori, (21) The 
Bhargava, (22) The Bakiya. (23) The Kukurgariya, (24) The Dama, 
(25) The Gopala, (26) The Govardhana, (27) The Tuke, (28) The 
Chattu, (29) The Shivali, (30) The Shakharaj, (31) The Umari, 
(32) The Manoha, (33) The Shivarajpur, (34) The Mandhna, 
(35) The Sape, (36) The Mandan Tirvedi, (37) The Lahari Tirvedi, 
(38) The Jethi Tirvedi. 

4. THE DUBES 

The Dube’s consist of the following sections: 

(1) The Kanchani, (2) The Singhva, (3) The Belava, (4) The 
Parava, (5) The Karaiya, (6) The Bargainya, (7) The Panchani, 
(8) The Lathiahi, (9) The Gurdvan, (10) The Methiber, (11) The 
Barhampuriya, (12) The Singilava, (13) The Kuchala, (14) The 
Munjalva, (15) The Paliya, (16) The Dhegava, (17) The Sisra, 
(18) The Sinani, (19) The Kudavarye, (20) The Kataiya, (21) The 
Panva. 


5. THE PATHAKS 

The following are the sections composing of the Pathakas: 

(1) The Sonaura, (2) The Ambatara, (3) The Patakhavaliya, (4) 
The Dhigavach, (5) The Bhadari. 

6. THE PANDES 

The Pande’s are divided into the following sections: 

(I) The Tirphala or Triphala, (2) The Jorava, (3) The Matainya, 
(4) The Toraya, (5) The Nakchauri, (6) The Parsiha, (7) The 
Sahankol, (8) The Barhadiya, (9) The Gegas, (10) The Khoriya, 

(II) The Pichaura, (12) The Pichaura Payasi, (13) The Jutiya or 
Jatya, (14) The Itar or Intar, (15) The Beshtaul or Beshtavala, (16) 
The Charpand, (17) The Sila, (18) The Adhurj, (19) The Madariya, 
(20) The Majgaum, (21) The Dilipapar, (22) The Payhatya, (23) 
The Nagav, (24) The Talava, (25) The Jambu. 

7. THE UPADHYAS 

There are five sections among the Upadhyas: 

(1) The Harainya or Hiranya, (2) The Devarainya, (3) The Khoriya, 
(4) The Jaithiya, (5) The Dahendra, (6) The Gorat, (7) The 
Ranisarap, (8) The Nizamabad, (9) The Dudholiya, (10) The Basgava. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


224 


224 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

8. THE CHAUBES 

The principal sub-divisions of the Chaube’s are: 

(1) The Nayapuras, (2) The Rargadis, (3) The Chaukhar, (4) The 
Katayas, (5) The Rampuras, (6) The Paliyas, (7) The Hardaspuras, 
(8) The Tibaiyas, (9) The Jamaduvas, (10) The Gargeya. 

9. THE DIKSHITAS 

The Dikshitas have the following sub-divisions: 

(1) The Devagaum, (2) The Kakari, (3) The Nevarshiya, (4) The 
Anter, (5) The Sukanta, (6) The Chaudhari, (7) The Jujatvatiyas. 

10. THE VAJAPEYIS 

The Vajapeyi’s consist of the following sub-divisions: 

(1) The Unche, or the High, (2) The Niche or the Low. 

Besides the divisions and sub-divisions of the Kanyakubjas mentioned 
above there are Kanyakubjas who are regarded as inferior and therefore 
isolated from the main divisions and sub-divisions. Among them are the 
following: 

(I) The Samdariya, (2) The Tirguvati, (3) The Bhaurha, (4) The 
Kabisa, (5) The Kevati, (6) The Chandravala, (7) The Kusumbhiya, 
(8) The Bisohya, (9) The Kanhali, (10) The Khajuvai, (11) The 
Kisirman, (12) The Paihtiya, (13) The Masonad, (14) The Bijara, 
(15) The Ansnaura. 

III. THE GAUDA BRAHMINS 

The Gauda Brahmins derive their name from the Province and (now 
ruined) city of Gauda, for long the capital of Bihar and Bengal (the 
seat of the Angas and Vangas or Bangas). The sub-divisions among the 
Gauda Brahmins are very considerable in number. The most conspicuous 
of them are the following: 

(I) The Gaudas or Kevala Gaudas, (2) Adi-Gaudas, (3) Shuklavala 
Adi-Gaudas, (4) Ojhas, (5) Sanadhya Gauda, (6) Chingalas, (7) 
Khandevalas, (8) Daymias, (9) Shri-Gaudas, (10) Tamboli Gaudas, 

(II) Adi-Shri Gaudas, (12) Gurjar Gaudas, (13) Tek Bara Gaudas, 
(14) Chamar Gaudas, (15) Hariyana Gaudas, (16) Kirtanya Gaudas, 
(17) Sukul Gaudas. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


225 


THE CURSE OF CASTE 225 

IV. THE UTKAL BRAHMINS 

Utkal is the ancient name of Orissa and Utkal Brahmins means 
Brahmins of Orissa. They are divided into: 

(1) The Shashani Brahmins, (2) The Shrotriya Brahmins, (3) The 
Panda Brahmins, (4) The Ghatiya Brahmins, (5) The Mahasthana 
Brahmins, (6) The Kalinga Brahmins. 

The Shashani Brahmins have the following sub-divisions. 

(1) The Savanta, (2) The Mishra, (3) The Nanda, (4) The Pate, 
(5) The Kara, (6) The Acharya, (7) The Satapasti, (8) The Bedi, 
(9) The Senapati, (10) The Parnagrahi, (11) The Nishank, (12) 
The Rainipati. 

The Shrotriya Brahmins have the four following sub-divisions: 

(1) Shrotriyas, (2) Sonarbani, (3) Teli, (4) Agrabaksha. 

V. THE MAITHILYA BRAHMINS 

The Maithilya Brahmins derive their designation from Mithila, 
an ancient division of India and which includes a great portion of the 
modern districts of Tirhut, Saran, Purnea and also parts of the adjacent 
tracts of Nepal. 

The following are the sub-divisions of the Maithilya Brahmins: 

(1) The Ojhas, (2) The Thakurs, (3) The Mishras, (4) The Puras, 
(5) The Shrotriyas, (6) The Bhuiharas. 

Of these the Mishras have the following sub-sections: 

(1) The Chandharis, (2) The Rayas, (3) The Parihastas, (4) The 
Khanas, (5) The Kumaras. 


Ill 

OTHER BRAHMINS 

The Panch Dravidas is a generic name for Brahmins living below the 
Vindhya and the Panch Gaudas is a generic name for Brahmins living 
above the Vindhyas. In other words, Panch Gauda is a name for Northern 
Brahmins and Panch Dravidas, a name for Southern Brahmins. What 
is, however, to be noted is that the five divisions of Brahmins composing 
the Northern Fraternity and Southern Fraternity of Brahmins do not 
exhaust all the divisions of Brahmins living in Northern or Southern 
India. To complete the subject it is necessary not only to refer to them 
but also to record their sub-divisions. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


226 


226 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

OTHER BRAHMINS OF SOUTH INDIA 

In this category fall the following: 

(1) The Konkani Brahmins 1 , (2) The Hubu 2 , (3) The Gaukarna 3 , 
(4) The Havika 4 , (5) The Tulva 5 , (6) The Amma Kodaga 6 , (7) The 
Nambudri 7 . 

The Nambudri Brahmins are the principal group of Brahmins living 
in Malabar. Besides the Nambudris there are also other sections of 
Brahmins. They are: 

(1) The Pottis, (2) The Muttadus, (3) The Fledus, (4) The Ramnad- 
writ Parasahas, (5) The Pattaras, (6) The Ambalvasis. 

OTHER RAJPUTA BRAHMINS 

The Varieties of Rajputa Brahmins not mentioned in the list of 
Gurjar Brahmins are: 

(1) The Shrimalis Brahmins, (2) The Sachoda Brahmins, (3) 
The Pallivalar Brahmins, (4) The Nandanas Brahmins, (5) The 
Pushakars Brahmins, (6) The Pokhar Sevakas Brahmins, (7) 
The Medatvala, (8) The Parikha Brahmins, (9) The Havanas 
Brahmins, (10) The Dakotas Brahmins, (11) The Garudiyas 
Brahmins, (12) The Acharjas, (13) The Bura Brahmins, (14) The 
Kapidas, (15) The Dahimas, (16) The Khandelvalas, (17) The 
Divas, (18) The Sikavadas, (19) The Chamatvalas, (20) The Marus, 
(21) The Shrivantas, (22) The Abhiras, (23) The Bhartanas, (24) 
The Sanacadas, (25) The Vagadis, (26) The Mewadas, (27) The 
Rajgurus, (28) The Bhats, (29) The Charanas. 

• • 


1 The Konkani Brahmins are to be distinguished from the Konkansthas who belong to 
Maharashtra. The Konkani Brahmins belong to the Portuguese territory of Goa. 

2 They come from Karwar. 

3 They come from .{Place not mentioned in MS. — Ed.) 

4 They are to be found in the vicinity of Tellicheri. 

5 They arc to be found near about Udipi. 

6 They arc to be found in Coorg. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


227 


BOOK III 


Political 


Seven essays on the political issues previously not 
published have been included under the category 
‘Political’ in this Book. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd 


MK SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


228 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


229 


Chapter 20 

FROM MILLIONS TO FRACTIONS 


I. Population of the Untouchables long unknown. II. The 
Census of 1911 and the first attempt at separate enumeration. 
III. Confirmation of the findings of 1911 Census. IV. Lothian 
Committee and the Hindu cry of “no Untouchables”. V. Reasons 
for the cry. VI. Attitude of the Backward Classes and the 
Muslims. 


I 

What is the total population of the Untouchables of India? This is 
bound to be the first question that a person who cares to know anything 
about them is sure to ask. It is now easy to answer this question. For the 
Census of India taken in 1931 gives it as 50 millions. While it is possible 
now to give more or less exact figures of the Untouchable population in 
India it was not possible to do so for a long time. 

This was due to various causes. Firstly untouchability is not a 
legal term. There is no exact legal definition of untouchability whereby 
it could be possible to define who is an Untouchable and who is not. 
Untouchability is a social concept which has become embodied in a 
custom and as custom varies so does untouchability. Consequently there 
is always some difficulty in the way of ascertaining the population of the 
Untouchables with mathematical exactitude. Secondly there has always 
been serious opposition raised by high caste Hindus to the enumeration 
by caste in the Census Report. They have insisted on the omission of 
the question regarding caste from the schedules and the suppression 
of the classification of the population by caste and tribe. A proposal 
to this effect was made in connection with the 1901 Census mainly 
on the ground that the distribution of various castes and tribes in the 
population changed at large intervals and that it was not necessary to 
obtain figures at each decennial enumeration. 

These grounds of objection did not have any effect on the Census 
Commissioner. In the opinion of the Census Commissioner enumeration 
by caste was important and necessary. It was argued by the Census 
Commissioner that, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


230 


230 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“Whatever view may be taken of the advantages or disadvantages 
of caste as a social institution, it is impossible to conceive of any 
useful discussion of the population questions in India in which caste 
would not be an important element. Caste is still ‘the foundation of 
the Indian social fabric,’ and the record of caste is still ‘the best guide 
to the changes in the various social strata in the Indian Society’. 
Every Hindu (using the term in its most elastic sense) is born into 
a caste and his caste determines his religious, social, economic and 
domestic life from the cradle to the grave. In western countries the 
major factors which determine the different strata of society, viz, 
wealth, education and vocation are fluid and catholic and tend to 
modify the rigidity of birth and hereditary position. In India spiritual 
and social community and traditional occupation override all other 
factors. Thus, where in censuses of western countries, an economic 
or occupational grouping of the population affords a basis for the 
combination of demographic statistics, the corresponding basis in 
the case of the Indian population is the distinction of religion and 
caste. Whatever view may be taken of caste as a national and social 
institution, it is useless to ignore it, and so long as caste continues 
to be used as one of the distinguishing features of an individual’s 
official and social identity, it cannot be claimed that a decennial 
enumeration helps to perpetuate an undesirable institution.” 

The objections to the enumeration by castes in the census were urged 
with greater force on the occasion of the census of 1911 when the special 
questionnaire containing ten tests was issued for the purpose of grouping 
together castes which satisfied those tests. There was no doubt that 
those tests were such as would mark off the Depressed Classes from the 
Caste Hindus. It was feared by the Caste Hindus that this circular was 
the result of the Muslim Memorial to the Secretary of State and its aim 
was to separate the Depressed Classes from the Hindus and thereby to 
reduce the strength of the Hindu Community and its importance. 

This agitation bore no fruit and the objection of separately 
enumerating in the Census Report those castes which satisfied those 
ten tests was carried out. The agitation however did not die out. It 
again cropped up at the Census of 1920. At this time, effort was made 
to put forth the objection to the caste return in a formal manner. 
A resolution was tabled in the Imperial Legislative Council in 1920 
attacking the caste inquiry on the grounds (a) that it was undesirable 
to recognize and perpetuate, by official action, the system of caste 
differentiation and (b) that in any case the returns were inaccurate 
and worthless, since the lower castes took the opportunity of passing 
themselves as belonging to groups of higher status. If this resolution 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


231 


FROM MILLIONS TO FRACTIONS 231 

had been carried, it would not have been possible to know the population 
of the Untouchables. Fortunately owing to the absence of the mover, 
the resolution was not discussed and the Census Commissioner of 1921 
remained free to carry out his inquiries in the usual manner. 

Thirdly no attempt was made for a separate enumeration of the 
Untouchables by any of the Census Commissioners previous to the year 
1911. The first general Census of India was taken in the year 1881. Beyond 
listing the different castes and creeds and adding up their numbers so as 
to arrive at the total figure of the population of India, the Census of 1881 
did nothing. It made no attempt to classify the different Hindu castes 
either into higher and lower or Touchable and Untouchable. The second 
general Census of India was taken in the year 1891. It was at this census 
that an attempt to classify the population on the basis of caste and race 
and grade was made by the Census Commissioner for the first time. 

The third general Census of India was taken in 1901. At this census 
a new principle of classification was adopted namely “Classification by 
Social precedence as recognized by native public opinion.” For a society 
like the Hindu society which does not recognize equality and whose social 
system is a system of gradation of higher and lower, this principle was 
the most appropriate one. Nothing can present a more intelligible picture 
of the social life and grouping of that large proportion of the people of 
India which is organized admittedly or tacitly on the basis of caste as 
this principle of social precedence. 

II 

The first attempt of a definite and deliberate kind to ascertain the 
population of the Untouchables was made by the Census Commissioner 
in 1911. 

The period immediately preceding the Census of 1911 was a period 
during which the Morley-Minto Reforms were in incubation. It was a 
period when the Mahomedans of India had started their agitation for 
adequate representation in the legislatures by separate electorates. As a 
part of their propaganda, the Mahomedans waited upon Lord Morley, the 
then Secretary of State for India in Council, in deputation and presented 
him a Memorial on the 27th January 1909. In that memorial there occurs 
the following statement: 

(The statement is not recorded in the MS. — Ed.) 

Whether there was any connection between what the Muslim 
deputation had urged in their memorial regarding the Untouchables 
in 1907 and the idea of the Census Commissioner four years after 
to make a separate enumeration of the Untouchables, is a matter on 
which nothing definite can be said. It is possible that what the Census 
Commissioner proposed to do in 1911 was only a culmination of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


232 


232 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

ways adopted by his predecessors in the matter of the demographic study of 
the population. Be that as it may, there was a great uproar on the part of 
the Hindus when the Census Commissioner announced his plan of separate 
enumeration of the Untouchables. It was said that this attempt of the Census 
Commissioner was the result of a conspiracy between the Musalmans and 
the British Government to divide and weaken the Hindu Community. It was 
alleged that what was behind this move was not a genuine desire to know the 
population of the Untouchables but the desire to break up the solidarity of 
the Hindu Community by separating the Untouchables from the Touchables. 
Many protest meetings were held all over the country by the Hindus and 
condemned in the strongest terms this plan of the Census Commissioner. 

The Commissioner of Census however undaunted by this storm of protest 
decided to carry out his plan. The procedure adopted by him for a separate 
enumeration of the Untouchables was of course a novel one. The Census 
Superintendents for different Provinces were instructed by the Census 
Commissioner to make separate enumeration of castes and tribes classed as 
Hindus but who did not conform to certain standards or who were subject 
to certain disabilities. 

Under these tests the Census Superintendents made a separate 
enumeration of castes and tribes who (1) denied the supremacy of the 
Brahmins, (2) did not receive the Mantra from Brahmana or other recognized 
Hindu Guru, (3) denied the authority of the Vedas, (4) did not worship the 
great Hindu Gods, (5) were not served by good Brahmanas, (6) have no 
Brahman priests at all, (7) have no access to the interior of the ordinary 
Hindu temple, (8) cause pollution, (9) bury their dead and (10) eat beef and 
do not revere the cow. 

The investigation conducted by the Census Commissioner left no room 
for guessing. For he found as a fact what the population of the Untouchables 
was. The table below gives the population of the Untouchables, province by 
province, as found by the Census Commissioner of 1911. 1 


Province 

Total 

population 
in millions 

Population of 
Depressed 
Classes in 
millions 

Total 

Seats 

Seats for 
the 

Depressed 

Classes 

Madras 

39.8 

6.3 

120 

2 

Bombay 

19.5 

0.6 

113 

1 

Bengal 

45.0 

9.9 

127 

1 

United Provinces 

47.0 

10.1 

120 

1 

Punjab 

19.5 

1.7 

85 


Bihar and Orissa 

32.4 

9.3 

100 

1 

Central Provinces 

12.0 

3.7 

72 

1 

Assam 

6.0 

0.3 

54 



221.2 

41.9 

791 

7 


1 This table is reprinted from ‘Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings & Speeches lot. 2, 
Education Department, Government of Maharashtra, Bombay, p. 364. It is not recorded 
in the MS. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


233 


FROM MILLIONS TO FRACTIONS 233 

An outsider might not realize the significance and the bearing of 
these tests. They might ask what all this got to do with untouchability. 
But he will realize the significance and the bearing on the question 
of ascertaining the population of the Untouchables. As has been said 
there is no legal definition of untouchability and there cannot be any. 
Untouchability does not express itself through the hair of the head or the 
colour of the skin. It is not a matter of blood. Untouchability expresses 
itself in modes of treatment and observance of certain practices. An 
Untouchable is a person who is treated in a certain way by the Hindus 
and who follows certain practices which are different from the Hindus. 
There are definite ways in which the Hindus treat the Untouchables 
in social matters. They are definite practices which are observed by 
the Untouchables. That being so the only method of ascertaining who 
are Untouchables is to adopt their ways and practices as the criteria 
and find out the communities which are subject to them. There is no 
other way. If the outsider bears this in mind, he will understand that 
even though the tests prescribed by the Census Commissioner do not 
show any colour of untouchability, they are in fact the hall marks of 
untouchability. That being so, there can be no manner of doubt that 
the procedure was proper and the tests were correct. Consequently it 
can be truly said, the results of this investigation were valuable and 
the figures obtained were accurate as far they can be in a matter of 
this sort. 


Ill 

The findings of the Census Commissioner of 1911 regarding the 
total population of the Untouchables were confirmed by the Census 
Commissioner of 1921. 

The Census Commissioner of 1921 also made an investigation to 
ascertain the population of the Untouchables. In this Report Part I para 
1931 the Census Commissioner observed: 

“It has been usual in recent years to speak of certain section 
of the community as ‘depressed classes’. So far as I am aware, 
the term has no final definition nor is it certain exactly whom it 
covers. In the Quinquennial Review on the Progress of Education 
from 1912/17 (Chapter XVIII paragraph 505) — the depressed classes 
are specifically dealt with from the point of view of Educational 
assistance and progress and in Appendix XIII to that Report a list 
of the castes and tribes constituting this section of the Community 
is given. The total population classed according to these lists as 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


234 


234 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


depressed amounted to 31 million persons or 19 per cent of the 
Hindu and Tribal population of British India. There is undoubtedly 
some danger in giving offence by making in a public report social 
distinction which may be deemed invidious; but in view of the 
lists already prepared and the fact that the “Depressed Classes” 
have, especially in South India, attained a class consciousness 
and a class organization, are served by special missions, “raised” 
by philanthrophic societies and officially represented in the 
Legislative Assemblies, it certainly seems advisable to face the 
facts and to attempt to obtain some statistical estimate of their 
numbers. I therefore asked Provincial Superintendents to let me 
have an estimate based on census figures of the approximate 
strength of the castes who were usually included in the category 
of “depressed”. 

“I received lists of some sort from all provinces and states 
except the United Provinces, where extreme delicacy of official 
sentiment shrank from facing the task of attempting even a 
rough estimate. The figures given are not based on exactly 
uniform criteria, as a different view is taken of the position of 
the same groups in different parts of India, and I have had in 
some cases to modify the estimates on the basis of the figures in 
the educational report and of information from the 1911 reports 
and tables. They are also subject to the general defect, which 
has already been explained, that the total strength of any caste 
is not recorded. The marginal statement gives however a rough 
estimate of the minimum members which may be considered to 
form the “depressed classes” of the Hindu community. The total 
of these provincial figures adds up to about 53 millions. This, 
however, must be taken as a low and conservative estimate since 
it does not include (1) the full strength of the castes and tribes 
concerned and (2) the tribal aborigines more recently absorbed 
in Hinduism, many of whom are considered impure. We may 
confidently place the numbers of these depressed classes all of 
whom are considered impure, at something between 55 and 60 
millions in India proper.” 

Then came the inquiry by the Simon Commission which was 
appointed by the British Parliament in 1929 to examine the working 
of the Reforms introduced by the Government of India Act of 1919 
and to suggest further reforms. 

At the time when the reforms which subsequently became 
embodied in the Act of 1919 were being discussed, the authors of 
the Montague-Chelmsford Report clearly recognized the problem of 
the Untouchables and the authors pledged themselves to make the 
best arrangement for their representation in the Legislatures. But the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


235 


FROM MILLIONS TO FRACTIONS 235 

Committee that was appointed under the chairmanship of Lord 
Southborough to devise the franchise and the electoral system ignored 
them altogether. The Government of India did not approve of this attitude 
and made the following comments: 

“They (Untouchables) are one fifth of the total population and 
have not been represented at all in the Morley-Minto Councils. The 
Committee’s report mentions them (Untouchables) twice, but only to 
explain that in the absence of satisfactory electorates they have been 
provided for by nomination. It does not discuss the position of these 
people, or their capacity for looking after themselves. Nor does it 

explain the amount of nomination which it suggests for them The 

measure of representation which they propose suggested that 

one fifth of the entire population of British India should be allotted 
seven seats out of practically eight hundred. It is true that in all 
the Councils there will be roughly speaking a one-sixth proportion 
of officials who may be expected to bear in mind the interests of 
the (Untouchables); but that arrangement is not, in our opinion, 
what the Report on reforms aims at. The authors stated that the 
(Untouchables) also should learn lessons of self protection. It is surely 
fanciful to hope that this result can be expected from including a 
single member of the community in an assembly where there are 
sixty or seventy caste Hindus. To make good the principles of the 
Report we must treat the outcastes more generously”. 

The Government recommended that the seats allotted to the 
Untouchables by the Committee should be doubled. Accordingly in 
place of seven they were given fourteen seats. It will be seen that the 
generosity of the Government of India when put into practice did not 
amount to much. It certainly did not do to the Untouchables the justice 
that was their due. 

Among the problems that were not properly settled in 1919, was the 
problem of the Untouchables, which was bound to loom large before the 
Simon Commission. Quite unexpectedly the problem received a special 
emphasis at the hands of the late Lord Birkenhead who was then the 


Secretary of State for India. In a speech which he made on 1 just 

before the appointment of the Simon Commission he said — (Left blank 
in the MS. — Ed.). 


Naturally the problem became a special task of the Simon 
Commission. Although the problem as presented was one of providing 
representation — and in that sense a political problem at the bottom 


Date not cited in the Ms- Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


236 


236 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

it was a problem, of ascertaining the population of the untouchables. 
Because unless the population was ascertained, the extent of representation 
in the legislature could not be settled. 

The Simon Commission had therefore to make a searching inquiry into 
the population of the untouchables. It called upon the various provincial 
governments to furnish returns showing the numbers of untouchables 
residing in their area and it is well known that the provincial governments 
took special care in preparing these returns. There can therefore be no 
question regarding the accuracy of the figure of the total population of 
the untouchables. The following table 1 gives the figures for the population 
of the untouchables as found by the Southborough Committee and by 
the Simon Commission. 


IV 

It is thus clear that the population of the Untouchables has been 
estimated to be somewhere about 50 millions. That this is the population 
of the Untouchables had been found by the Census Commissioner of 
1911 and confirmed by the Census Commissioner of 1921 and by the 
Simon Commission in 1929. This fact was never challenged by any Hindu 
during the twenty years it stood on the record. Indeed in so far as the 
Hindu view could be gauged from the reports of the different Committees 
appointed by the Provincial and Central Legislatures to cooperate with 
the Simon Commission, there can be no doubt that they accepted this 
figure without any demur. 

Suddenly however in 1932, when the Lothian Committee came and 
began its investigation, the Hindus adopted a challenging mood and 
refused to accept this figure as the correct one. In some provinces the 
Hindus went to the length of denying that there were any Untouchables 
there at all. This episode reveals the mentality of the Hindus and as 
such deserves to be told in some details. 

The Lothian Committee was appointed in consequence of the 
recommendations made by the Franchise Sub-Committee of the 
Indian Round Table Conference. The Committee toured the whole of 
India, visited all the Provinces except Central Provinces and Assam. 
To aid the Committee, there were constituted in each Province by 
the provincial Government, Provincial Committees comprising, so far 
as possible, spokesmen of the various schools of thought and of the 
various political interests existing in each Province. These Provincial 
Committees were in the main composed of members of the Provincial 
Councils with non-officials as Chairmen. With a view to concentrating 
discussion, the Indian Franchise Committee issued a questionnaire 

1 Table not given in the Ms — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


237 


FROM MILLIONS TO FRACTIONS 237 

covering the field included in its terms of reference. The procedure 
laid down by the Franchise Committee was that Provincial 
Governments should formulate their own views on the points raised 
in the questionnaire and discuss them with the Committee and that 
the Provincial Committees who were regarded as the authoritative 
advisers should independently formulate their views and should at 
their discretion conduct a preliminary examination of witnesses on the 
basis of their written statements. The Report of the Indian Franchise 
Committee was therefore a thorough piece of work based upon detailed 
investigation. 

The letter of instruction sent by the Prime Minister to Lord 
Lothian as Chairman of the Indian Franchise Committee and which 
constituted the terms of reference of the Committee contained the 
following observation : 

“It is evident from the discussions which have occurred in 
various connections in the (Indian Round Table) Conference 
that the new constitution must make adequate provision for the 
representation of the depressed classes and that the method of 
representation by nomination is no longer regarded as appropriate. 

As you are aware, there is a difference of opinion whether the 
system of separate electorates should be instituted for the depressed 
classes and your committee’s investigation should contribute 
towards the decision of this question by indicating the extent to 
which the depressed classes would be likely, through such general 
extension of the Franchise as you may recommend, to secure the 
right to vote in ordinary electorates. On the other hand, should 
it be decided eventually to constitute separate electorates for the 
depressed classes, either generally or in those Provinces in which 
they form a distinct and separate element in the population, 
your Committee’s inquiry into the general problem of extending 
the franchise should place you in possession of facts which would 
facilitate the devising of a method of separate representation for 
the depressed classes”. 

Accordingly in the questionnaire that was issued by the Indian 
Franchise Committee there was included the following Question: 

“What communities would you include as belonging to Depressed 
Classes? Would you include classes other than Untouchables, and 
if so which”? 

I was a member of the Indian Franchise Committee. When I became 
a member of the Committee, I was aware that the principal question 
on which I should have to give battle with the Caste Hindus was the 
question of joint versus separate electorates for the Untouchables. I 
knew, that in the Indian Franchise Committee, the odds would be 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


238 


238 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

heavily against them. I was to be the only representative of the 
Untouchables in the Committee as against half a dozen of the Caste 
Hindus. Against such an unequal fight I had prepared myself. Before 
accepting membership of the Indian Franchise Committee, I had stipulated 
that the decision of the question whether the Untouchables should have 
joint or separate electorates should not form part of the terms of reference 
to the Committee. This was accepted and the question was excluded 
from the purview of the Indian Franchise Committee. I had therefore 
no fear of being out voted on this issue in the Committee — a strategy 
for which the Hindu Members of the Committee did not forgive me. 
But there arose another problem of which I had not the faintest idea. 
I mean the problem of numbers. The problem of numbers having been 
examined between 1911 to 1929 by four different authorities, who found 
that the population of Untouchables was somewhere about 50 millions, 
I did not feel that there would be any contest over this issue before the 
Indian Franchise Committee. 

Strange as it may appear the issue of numbers was fought out most 
bitterly and accrimoniously before the Indian Franchise Committee. 
Committee after Committee and witness after witness came forward 
to deny the existence of the Untouchables. It was an astounding 
phenomenon with which I was confronted. It would be impossible to refer 
to the statement of individual witnesses who came forward to deny the 
existence of such a class as the Untouchables. It would be enough if I 
illustrate my point by referring to the views of the Provincial Franchise 
Committees and their members relating to the question of the population 
of the Untouchables. 


PUNJAB 

Opinion of the Punjab Government. 

“The Punjab Government is of opinion that the enfranchisement of 
the tenant will give the vote to a considerable number of the Depressed 
Classes and to that extent will give them influence in the election of 
representatives to the Council.” 1 

“As regards the Depressed Classes, the Punjab Government has 
no reason to depart from the view which it has already expressed in 
para 25 of the Memorandum containing the opinions of the official 
members of the Government on the recommendations of the Indian 

1 Memorandum by the Punjab Government to Indian Franchise Committee-I.F.C, Vol. 
111. p. (not cited in the Ms) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


239 


FROM MILLIONS TO FRACTIONS 239 

Statutory Commission, that these classes are not a pressing problem in 
the Punjab and will get some representation as tenants .” 1 

Opinion of the Punjab Provincial Franchise Committee. 

“K. B. Din Mahomed and Mr. Hansraj (who represented the 
Untouchables on the Committee) held that, while there are no 
depressed classes among the Musalmans, there exist depressed classes 
among the Hindus and Sikhs Their total number being 1,310,709. 

Mr. Hansraj considers this list incomplete.” 

“They held that provision should be made for separate 
representation by treating the depressed classes as a separate 
community. Mr. Nazir Husain, Rai Bahadur Chaudhri Chhotu 
Ram, Mr. Own Roberts, K. B. Muhammad Hayat, Mr. Qureshi, 

Mr. Chatterji, Sardar Bhuta Singh and Pandit Nanak Chand held 
that it is impossible to say that there are depressed classes in the 
Punjab in the sense that any person by reason of his religion suffers 

any diminution of civic rights The Chairman, Pandit Nanak 

Chand and Sardar Bhuta Singh are of opinion that the depressed 
classes do not exist in the sense in which they exist in Southern 
India, and that, while there are in the villages certain classes who 
occupy a very definitely inferior economic and social position, it is 
not possible to differentiate the Hindu leather worker or Chamar 
who is claimed as a depressed class from the Musalman leather 
worker or Mochi who no one alleges belongs to a separate class.” 2 

It will thus be seen that the Punjab Provincial Government avoided 
to answer the question. The Punjab Provincial Committee by a majority 
denied that there existed a class such as depressed or untouchable. 

UNITED PROVINCES 

Opinion of the Provincial Franchise Committee. 

“The United Provinces Franchise Committee is of opinion that 
only those classes should be called “depressed” which are untouchable. 
Judged by this test, the problem of untouchability is non-existent in 
these provinces except in the case of Bhangis, Doms and Dhanuks, 
whose total population, including those sections which are touchable 
is only 582, 000. ” 3 

Babu Ram Sahai, a member of the United Provinces Pronvincial 
Franchise Committee representing the untouchable classes, in his 
minute of dissent gave the numbers 4 of the Untouchables in U. P. as 

1 Supplementary Memorandum by the Punjab Government, I.F.C., Vol. Ill, p. 29. 

2 Memorandum by the Punjab Provincial Franchise Committee, I.F.C., Vol. Ill, p. 35. 

3 I.F.C. Vol. Ill, p. 398. 

4 Ibid., p. 440. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


240 


240 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

11,435,417. Rai Sahib Babu Ramcharan another member of the United 
Provinces Provincial Franchise Committee representing the Depressed 
Classes in his minute of dissent gave the numbers 1 of the Depressed 
Classes in U.P. as 20 millions. 

The Government of the United Provinces reported 2 that the maximum 
estimate amounts to 17 million persons; the minimum something less 
than one million. In its opinion the least number was 6,773,814. 

BENGAL 

The Bengal Provincial Franchise Committee in its first Report 3 said. 

“The Committee could come to no decision on this question and 
resolved to put it back for consideration along with the Central 
Committee.” 

In its final Report the same Committee said — 

“According to the criterion laid down viz, untouchability and 
unapproachability, as these terms are understood in other parts of 
India, the Committee consider that, except Bhuimalis only, there is 
no such class in Bengal.” 4 

Mr. Mullick who was a representative of the Depressed Classes on 
the Bengal Provincial Franchise Committee in his minute of dissent gave 
a list of 86 castes as belonging to the Untouchable Classes. 

BIHAR AND ORISSA 

The population of the Depressed Classes in Bihar and Orissa according 
to the Census of 1911 was 9,300,000 s and according to the Census of 
1921 was 8,000,000 6 . 

But the Bihar and Orissa Provincial Franchise Committee in its 
provincial memorandum 7 observed — 

“It is difficult to give an exhaustive list of the castes or sects 
who come under the definition of Depressed Classes. The only classes 
which can be called depressed are Mushahars, Dusadhs, Chamars, 
Doms and Mehtars. Their number is not sufficiently large to justify 
their being grouped in a separate electoral roll. The problem of 
Depressed Classes is not so acute in Bihar as in Bombay or South 
India. The Committee considers that there is no need for special 
representation of the Depressed Classes.” 

1 I.F.C., Vol. Ill, p. 285. 

2 Ibid., pp. 297-98. 

3 Ibid., p. 189. 

4 Ibid. p. 230. 

5 Quoted from ‘Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Writings & Speeches’. Vol. 2. p. 437 — Ed. 

6 Ibid., p. 431 — Ed. 

7 I.F.C., Vol. Ill, p. 129. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 

FROM MILLIONS TO FRACTIONS 
The same Committee in its final report 1 said : 

“The classes which are commonly regarded as Untouchables 
are Chamar, Busadh, Dom, Halalkhor, Hari, Mochi, Mushahar, 

Pan Pasi The majority of the Committee, however consider 

that there is no need for special representation as the Depressed 
Classes as their grievances are not so acute here as in Bombay 
or South India”. 

Why did the Hindus suddenly turn to reduce the population of the 
Untouchables from millions to fractions ? The figure of 50 millions 
had stood on the record from 1911. It had not been questioned by 
any one. How is it that in 1932 the Hindus made so determined an 
effort without any regard to the means to challenge the accuracy of 
this figure ? 

The answer is simple. Up to 1932 the Untouchables had no political 
importance. Although they were outside the pale of Hindu Society 
which recognizes only four classes namely Brahmins, Kshatriyas, 
Vaishyas and Shudras, yet for political purposes they were reckoned 
as part of the Hindu Society. So that for political purposes such as 
representation in the Legislature etc., the question of the population 
of the Untouchables was of no consequence. Up to 1932 the political 
question was one of division of seats in the Legislature between Hindus 
and Musalmans only and as there was no question of the seats that 
came to the lot of the Hindus being partitioned between the Touchables 
and the Untouchables and as the whole share went to the Touchables 
they did not care to inquire what the population of the Untouchables 
was. By 1932 the situation had completely altered. The question of 
partition was no longer a question between Hindus and Musalmans. 
The Untouchables had begun to claim that there should not only be 
a partition between the Hindus and Musalmans but that the share 
allotted to the Hindus should be further partitioned and the share of 
the Untouchables given to them to be enjoyed by them exclusively. 
This claim to separation was recognized and the Untouchables were 
allowed to be represented by members of their own class at the Indian 
Round Table Conference. Not only was the separate existence of the 
Untouchables thus recognized but the Minorities Sub-Committee of 
the Indian Round Table Conference had accepted the principle that 
under the new Constitution the depressed classes should be given 
representation in all Legislatures in proportion to their population. 
It is thus that the population of the Untouchables became a subject 
of importance. The less the population of the Untouchables the 
greater the share of the political representation that would go to 
the Touchable Hindus. This will explain why the Touchables who 


241 

241 


I.F.C. Vol. Ill, p. 188. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


242 


242 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

before 1932 did not care to quarrel over the question of the population 
of the Untouchables, after 1932 began denying the very existence of such 
a class as Untouchables. 

The ostensible grounds urged by the Hindus before the Lothian 
Committee for reducing the population of the Untouchables were two. 
One was that the figures given by the Census Commissioner were for 
Depressed Classes and not for Untouchables and that Depressed Classes 
included other classes besides Untouchables. The second ground urged by 
them was that, the definition of the word should be uniform throughout 
all India and should be applied in all Provinces in determining the 
population of the Untouchables. In other words they objected to a local 
test of untouchability. 

The first contention was absolutely untrue. The term Depressed 
Classes was used as a synonym for Untouchables and the term Depressed 
Classes was used instead of the term Untouchables because the latter, 
it was felt, would give offence to the people meant to be included under 
the term. That, it was used to denote only the Untouchables and it did 
not include the Aboriginals or the Criminal Tribes was made clear in 
the debate that took place in the Imperial Legislative Council in 1916 
on the Resolution moved by the Honourable Mr. Dadabhoy. The second 
contention of the caste Hindus was that the test of untouchability should 
be uniform. The object of putting forth this contention was to reduce the 
number of Untouchables. It is well known that there are variations in 
the forms which untouchability assumes in different parts of India. In 
some parts of India, Untouchables are unseeables i.e. they cause pollution 
if they come within the sight of a Touchable Hindu. In some parts 
Untouchables are unapproachables i.e. they cause pollution if they come 
within a certain distance of a Touchable Hindu. Of these unapproachables 
there are two classes. There is a class of unapproachables who cannot 
come within a certain fixed distance of a Touchable Hindu. There is 
another class of unapproachables who cannot come so near a Hindu as 
to let his shadow fall upon him. In some parts of India an Untouchable 
is not an unseeable or unapproachable. It is only his physical contact 
which causes pollution. In some parts an Untouchable is one who is not 
allowed to touch water or food. In some parts an Untouchable is one 
who is not allowed to enter a temple. With these variations it is clear, 
that if unseeability was taken as the only test of untouchability, then 
the unapproachables would have to be excluded from the category of 
Untouchables. If unapproachability was taken as a test, then those whose 
touch only caused pollution will have to be excluded from the category of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


243 


FROM MILLIONS TO FRACTIONS 243 

Untouchables. If causing pollution by touch be taken as a test, then 
those whose disability is that they are not allowed to touch water or 
food or those whose only disability is that they are not allowed to 
enter the temple, shall have to be excluded. This is what the Hindus 
wanted to do. By insisting upon uniform test they wanted to eliminate 
certain classes from the category of Untouchables and thereby reduce 
the population of the Untouchables. Obviously their point of view was 
fallacious. Untouchability is an outword expression of the inner repulsion 
which a Hindu feels towards a certain person. The form which this 
repulsion takes is comparatively a matter of small moment. The form 
merely indicates the degree of repulsion. Wherever there is repulsion 
there is untouchability. This simple truth the Hindus knew. 

But they kept on insisting upon uniformity of test because they wanted 
somehow to reduce the population of the Untouchables and to appropriate 
to themselves a larger share of political representation. 

VI 

This struggle between the Hindus and the Untouchables constituted 
undoubtedly the main episode. But within this episode there was another 
which, though of a smaller character, was yet full of significance. It was 
the struggle between the Backward Classes and the Untouchables. The 
representatives of the Backward Classes contended that the category 
known as Depressed Classes should not only include Untouchables 
in the strict sense of that term but should also include those classes 
which are economically and educationally backward. The object of 
those that wanted, that not only the Untouchables but also those 
who are educationally and economically backward shall also be given 
separate representation, was a laudable one. In putting forth this 
contention they were not asking for anything that was new. Under the 
reformed constitution that came into operation in 1920, the right of the 
economically and educationally backward communities was recognized 
in the two provinces of India namely Bombay and Madras. In Bombay 
the, Marathas and allied castes and in Madras the Non-Brahmins 
were given separate representation on the only ground that they were 
economically and educationally backward. It was feared that if special 
representation was not given to those communities, they would be 
politically suppressed by the minority of high caste Hindus such as 
Brahmins and allied castes. There are many communities in other 
Provinces who are in the same position and who need special political 
representation to prevent their being suppressed by the higher castes. It 
was therefore perfectly proper for the representatives of the Backward 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


244 


244 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Classes from the Hindus to have claimed special representation for 
themselves . 1 If their point of view had been accepted the total number 
of Depressed Classes would have swelled to enormous proportions. But 
they received no support either from the Untouchables or from the high 
caste Hindus. The Hindus were opposed to the move which was calculated 
to increase the population of the Depressed Classes. The Untouchables 
did not want to be included in their category any class of people who 
were not really Untouchables. The proper course for these backward 
communities was to have asked to make a division of Touchable Hindus 
into advanced and backward and to have claimed separate representation 
for the Backward. In that effort the Untouchables would have supported 
them. But they did not agree to this and persisted in being included 
among the Depressed Classes largely because they thought that this was 
easier way of securing their object. But as the Untouchables opposed this 
the backward communities turned and joined the Hindus in denying the 
existence of Untouchables, more vehemently than the Hindus. 

In this struggle between the Touchables and Untouchables the latter 
did not get any support from the Mahomedans. It will be noticed that 
in the Punjab Provincial Franchise Committee, only one Mahomedan 
supported the representative of the Untouchables in his assertion that 
there are in the Punjab communities which are treated as Untouchables. 
The rest of the Mahomedan members of the Committee did not join. 
In Bengal the Hindu and the Mahomedan members of the Bengal 
Provincial Franchise Committee agreed not to express any view on 
the matter. It is rather strange that the Mahomedans should have 
kept mum. It was in their interest that the Untouchables should be 
recognized as a separate political community. This separation between 
the Touchables and the Untouchables was to their benefit. Why did 
they not help the Untouchables in this struggle for numbers? There 
were two reasons why the Mahomedans took this attitude. In the first 
place the Mahomedans were asking for more than their population 
ratio of representation. They were asking for what in Indian political 
parlance is known as weightage. They knew that their weightage must 
involve a loss to the Hindus and the only question was which section 
of the Hindus should bear the loss. The Touchable Hindus would not 

1 The necessity for making such provision for the Backward Classes in U. P. from 
which this demand mainly came was amply demonstrated by what the Government of U. P. 
said in its Memorandum to the Simon Commission. Regarding the composition of the U. P. 
Legislature it said — “In the Province as a hole the four leading Hindu Castes, Brahman, 
Thakur, Vaishya and Kayastha form 21.5 per cent of the total Hindu population, but these 
four castes have supplied no less than 93 per cent of the Hindu Members of Council. The 
Jats, with 1.8 per cent of the population, have contributed another 5 per cent to the Hindu 
Membership; and all the millions included in the multitude of other Hindu Castes, including 
the real agricultural castes, though they amount to over 76 per cent of the Hindu population 
have only succeeded in supplying 2 per cent of the representation”, p. 560. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


245 


FROM MILLIONS TO FRACTIONS 245 

mind the weightage if it could be granted without reducing their share. 
How to do this was the problem and the only way out of it was to reduce 
the share of the Untouchables. To reduce the share meant to reduce the 
population. This is one reason why the Mahomedans did not help the 
Untouchables in this struggle for numbers. The second reason why the 
Mahomedans did not help the Untouchables was the fear of exposure by 
the Hindus. Although Islam is the one religion which can transcend race 
and colour and unite diverse people into a compact brotherhood, yet Islam 
in India has not succeeded in uprooting caste from among the Indian 
Musalmans. Caste feeling among the Musalmans is not so verulent as 
it is among the Hindus. But the fact is that, it exists. That this caste 
feeling among the Musalmans leads to social gradation, a feature of the 
Muslim Community in India, has been noticed by all those who have had 
an occasion to study the subject. The Census Commissioner for Bengal 
in his report says: (The quotation is not recorded in the MS. — Ed.) 

These facts are quite well known to the Hindus and they were 
quite prepared to cite them against the Muslims if the Muslims went 
too far in helping the Untouchables in this struggle for numbers and 
thereby bringing about a dimunition of the seats for Caste Hindus in 
the Legislature. The Mahomedans knew their own weak points. They did 
not wish to give an excuse to the Hindus to rake up the social divisions 
among the Musalmans and thought that their interest would be best 
served by their taking a non-partisan attitude. 

The Untouchables were thus left to themselves to fight for their 
numbers. But even they could not be depended upon to muster for the 
cause. When the Hindus found that they could not succeed in reducing 
the number of the Untouchables, they tried to mislead the Untouchables. 
They began telling the Untouchables that Government was making 
a list of the Untouchable communities and it was wrong to have a 
community’s name entered in such list because it would perpetuate 
untouchability. Acting on this advice, many communities who were 
actually an Untouchable community would send a petition stating that 
it was not classed as Untouchable and should not be listed. Much effort 
had to be made to induce such communities to withdraw such petitions 
by informing them that the real purpose was to estimate their numbers 
in order to fix their seats in the Legislature. 

Lortunately for all, this struggle is now over and the controversy 
is closed and the population of the Untouchables can never be open 
to dispute. The Untouchables are now statutorily defined. Who are 
Untouchables is laid down by a schedule to the Government of India 
Act 1935 which describes them as Scheduled Castes. But the struggle 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


246 


246 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

reveals a trait of Hindu character. If the Untouchables make no noise, 
the Hindu feels no shame for their condition and is quite indifferent as to 
their numbers. Whether they are thousands or millions of them, he does 
not care to bother. But if the Untouchables rise and ask for recognition, 
he is prepared to deny their existence, repudiate his reponsibility and 
refuse to share his power without feeling any compunction or remorse. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


247 


Chapter 21 

THE REVOLT OF THE 
UNTOUCHABLES 


The movement of the Untouchables against the injustice of the Hindu 
Social Order has a long history behind it, especially in Maharashtra. This 
history falls into two stages. The first stage was marked by petitions 
and protests. The second stage is marked by open revolt in the form 
of direct action against the Hindu Established Order. This change of 
attitude was due to two circumstances. In the first place it was due to 
the realization that the petitions and protests had failed to move the 
Hindus. In the second place Governments had declared that all public 
utilities and public institutions are open to all citizens including the 
Untouchables. The right to wear any kind of clothes or ornaments are 
some of the rights which the British Indian Law gives to the Untouchables 
along with the rest. To these were added the rights to the use of public 
utilities and institutions, such as wells, schools, buses, trams, Railways, 
Public offices, etc., were now put beyond the pale of doubt. But owing 
to the opposition of the Hindus the Untouchables cannot make any use 
of them. It is to meet the situation, the Untouchables decided to change 
the methods and to direct action to redress their wrongs. This change 
took place about 1920. 


I 

Of such attempts at direct action only few can be mentioned so as 
to give an idea of the revolt of the Untouchables against the Hindu 
Social Order. Of the attempts made to vindicate the right to use the 
public roads, it is enough to mention one, most noteworthy attempt in 
this behalf was that made by the Untouchables of Travencore State in 
1924 to obtain the use of the roads which skirted the temple at Vaikom. 
These roads were public roads maintained by the State for the use of 
everybody, but on account of their proximity to the temple building, the 
Untouchables were not allowed to use certain sections which skirted 
the temple too closely. Ultimately as a result of Satyagraha, the temple 
compound was enlarged and the road was realigned so that there the 
Untouchables even if they used it were no longer within the polluting 
distance of the temple. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


248 


248 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

ii 

Of the attempts made to vindicate the right to take water from the 
public watering places, it is enough to mention the case of the Chawdar 
Tank. 

This Chawdar Tank is situated in the town of Mahad in the Kolaba 
District of Bombay Presidency. The tank is a vast expanse of water 
mainly fed by the rains and a few natural springs. The sides of the 
tank are embanked. Around the tank there are s nail strips of land on 
all sides belonging to private individuals. Beyond this strip of land lies 
the Municipal road which surrounds the tank and beyond the road are 
houses owned by the Touchables. The tank lies in the heart of the Hindu 
quarters and is surrounded by Hindu residence. 

This tank is an old one and no one knows who built it or when it 
was built. But in 1869 when a Municipality was established by the 
Government for the town of Mahad, it was handed over to the Municipality 
by the Government and has since then been treated as a Municipal i.e., 
public tank. 

Mahad is a business centre. It is also the headquarters of a taluk. 
The Untouchables either for purposes of doing their shopping and also 
for the purpose of their duty as village servants had to come to Mahad 
to deliver to the taluka officer either the correspondence sent by village 
officials or to pay Government revenue collected by village officials. The 
Chawdar tank was the only public tank from which an outsider could 
get water. But the Untouchables were not allowed to take water from 
this tank. The only source of water for the Untouchables was the well in 
the Untouchables quarters in the town of Mahad. This well was at some 
distance from the centre of the town. It was quite choked on account of 
its neglect by the Municipality. 

The Untouchables therefore were suffering a great hardship in the 
matter of water. This continued till matters got going. In 1923 the 
Legislative Council of Bombay passed a resolution to the effect that the 
Untouchable classes be allowed to use all public watering places, wells, 
Dharmashalas which are built and maintained out of public funds, or are 
administered by bodies appointed by Government or created by Statutes 
as well as public schools, courts, offices and dispensaries. Government 
accepted the resolution and issued the following orders: 

“In pursuance of the foregoing Council Resolution the 
Government of Bombay are pleased to direct that all heads of 
offices should give effect to the resolution so far as it related to 
the public places, institutions belonging to and maintained by 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


249 


THE REVOLT OF THE UNTOUCHABLES 249 

Government. The Collectors should be requested to advise the local 

bodies in their jurisdiction to consider the desirability of accepting 

the recommendations made in the Resolution.” 

In accordance with this order of the Government, the Collector of Kolaba 
forwarded a copy thereof to the Mahad Municipality for consideration. 
The Mahad Municipality passed a resolution on 5th January 1924 to the 
effect that the Municipality had no objection to allow the Untouchables 
to use the tank. Soon after this resolution was passed there was held 
at Mahad, a Conference of Untouchables of the Kolaba District over 
which I presided. The Conference met for two days, the 18th and 20th 
March 1927. This was the first Conference of the Untouchables held in 
the Kolaba District. Over 2,500 Untouchables attended the Conference 
and there was great enthusiasm. On the first day of the Conference, 
I delivered my presidential address in which I exhorted them to fight 
for their rights, give up their dirty and vicious habits and rise to full 
manhood. Thereafter high caste Hindus who were present and, who 
held out that they were the friends of the Untouchables, addressed the 
gathering and told the Untouchables to be bold and exercise the right 
that is given to them by law. With this, the proceedings of the first day 
were closed. The subject committee met at night to consider the resolution 
to be moved in open conference the next day. In the Subject Committee, 
attention was drawn by some people to the fact that there was great 
difficulty at Mahad for the Untouchables in the matter of obtaining water 
for drinking purposes, and that this difficulty was felt particularly by 
the members of the Reception Committee of the Conference which had 
to spend Rs. 15 an enormous amount to employ caste Hindus to dole 
out water in sufficient quantity to satisfy the needs of those who had 
attended the Conference. 

Next day on the 20th, the Conference met about 9 in the morning. 
The resolutions agreed upon in the Subject Committee were moved 
and passed by the Conference. It took about three hours in all. In the 
end one of my co-workers in moving a vote of thanks to the President 
and others who had helped to make the Conference a success referred 
to the question of the difficulty in the matter of getting water and 
exhorted the Untouchables present to go to the tank and exercise their 
right to take water from Chawdar tank, especially as the Municipality 
had by resolution declared it open to the Untouchables and that their 
Hindu friends were ready to help them. The Hindus who had exhorted 
them to be bold and begin fearlessly to exercise their rights, instantly 
realised that this was a bombshell and immediately ran away. But the 
effect upon the Untouchables was very different. They were electrified 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


250 


250 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

by this call to arms. To a man they rose and the body of 2,500 Untouchables 
led by me and my co-workers marched in a procession through the main 
streets. The news spread like wild fire while crowds thronged the streets 
to witness it. 

The Hindu inhabitants of the town saw the scene. They were taken 
by storm. They stood aghast witnessing this scene which they had never 
seen before. For the moment they seemed to be stunned and paralized. 
The procession in form of fours marched past and went to the Chawdar 
tank, and the Untouchables for the first time drank the water. Soon the 
Hindus, realizing what had happened, went into frenzy and committed 
all sorts of atrocities upon the Untouchables who had dared to pollute 
the water. These atrocities will be narrated in their proper places. 

The assault committed by the Hindus on the Untouchables at Mahad 
when they entered the Chawdar tank was undoubtedly a challenge to 
the Untouchables. The Untouchables on the other hand were determined 
not to be satisfied with merely exercising their right but to see it 
established. They naturally felt that they must take up the challenge 
thrown at them by the Hindus. Accordingly a second Conference of the 
Untouchables was called. The Untouchables were told that they must 
come fully prepared for all eventualities for Satyagraha (i.e., for civil 
disobedience and even for going to gaol). 

The Hindus, when they came to know of this, applied to the 
District Magistrate of Kolaba for issuing an order under Section 144 
of the Criminal Procedure Code against the Untouchables, prohibiting 
them from entering the Chawdar Tank and polluting its water. The 
District Magistrate refused and said that the tank was a public tank 
open to all citizens and he could not by law prevent the Untouchables 
from taking water therefrom. He advised them to go to a Court of 
law and get their right of exclusive user established. The dates fixed 
for the Conference were 25th, 26th, 27th of December 1927. As these 
dates drew near, and as they heard that the Untouchables were quite 
in earnest, and knowing that the District Magistrate had refused to 
come to their rescue, they did the only thing that was open to them, 
namely, to get their right to exclude the Untouchables from a public 
tank established by law. Accordingly, nine Hindus drawn from different 
castes joined as Plaintiffs in filing on 12th December 1927 a suit No. 
405 of 1927 as representatives of the Hindus, in the Court of Sub-Judge 
of Mahad. I and four others were made defendants as representing the 
Untouchables. The suit was for obtaining a declaration ‘that the said 
Chawdar tank is of the nature of private property of the Touchable 
classes only and that the Untouchable classes have no right to go to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


251 


THE REVOLT OF THE UNTOUCHABLES 251 

that tank nor take water therefrom and also for obtaining a perpetual 
injunction restraining the defendants from doing any of those acts.’ On 
the same day on which the suit was filed, the plaintiffs applied to the 
Court for a temporary injunction against the defendants restraining 
them from going to the tank and taking water therefrom pending the 
decision of the suit. The judge holding that it was a fit case, granted 
a temporary injunction against me and the other defendants on the 
14th December 1927. 

The temporary injunction issued by the Judge was sent to Bombay 
and was served upon me two or three days before the Conferences 
actually met. There was no time to have consultation and no time to 
postpone the Conference either. I decided to leave the matter to the 
Conference to decide. 

The Conference was called with the specific object of establishing 
the right to take water from the tank which was challenged by the 
Hindus last time. The District Magistrate had left the way open. 
But here was a Judge who had issued an order banning such action. 
Naturally, when the Conference met, the first question it was called 
on to consider was whether to disobey the order of injunction issued 
by the Court and enter the tank. The District Magistrate who had 
been favourable to the Untouchables now took a different view. He 
explained his view very clearly to the Conference which he came and 
addressed personally. He said that if the Civil Court had not issued 
an injunction, he would have helped the Untouchables in their attempt 
to enter the tank as against the caste Hindus, but that as the Sub- 
Judge had issued his order, his position had become different. He 
could not allow the Untouchables to go to the tank because such an 
act would amount indirectly to help them to break the order of His 
Majesty’s Court with impunity. He therefore felt bound to issue an 
order prohibiting the Untouchables, should they insist on going to the 
tank notwithstanding the injunction — not because he wanted to favour 
the Hindus but because he was bound to maintain the dignity of the 
Civil Court by seeing to it that its order was respected. 

The Conference took what the Collector had said into its 
consideration and also the reaction of the Hindus to the attempt of 
the Untouchables going to the tank in defiance of the order of the 
Court which they had obtained. In the end, the Conference came to 
the conclusion that it was better and safer for them to follow law and 
see how far it helped them to secure their rights. It was therefore 
decided to suspend civil disobedience of the order of the Judge till 
the final decision of the suit. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


252 


252 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The occasion for civil disobedience never came because the 
Untouchables won the suit and the Hindus lost it. One of the principal 
reasons which led the Untouchables to follow law and suspend civil 
disobedience was that they wanted to have a judicial pronouncement 
on the issue whether the custom of untouchability can be recognized 
by the Court of law as valid. The rule of law is that a custom to be 
valid must be immemorial, must be certain and must not be opposed to 
morality or public policy. The Untouchables’ view is that it is a custom 
which is opposed to morality and public policy. But it is no use unless 
it is declared to be so by a judicial tribunal. Such a decision declaring 
the invalidity of the custom of untouchability would be of great value 
to the Untouchables in their fight for civil rights because it would seem 
illegal to import untouchability in civic matters. The victory of the 
Untouchables in the Chawdar tank dispute was very great. But it was 
disappointing in one way that the Bombay High Court did not decide 
the issue whether the custom of untouchability was valid or not. They 
decided the case against the Hindus on the ground that they failed to 
prove that the custom alleged by them in respect of the tank was not 
immemorial. They held that the custom itself was not proved. The tank 
became open to the Untouchables. But the Untouchables cannot be said 
to have gained their point. The main issue was whether the custom of 
untouchability was a legal custom. Unfortunately the High Court avoided 
to give judgment on that issue. The Untouchables had to continue their 
struggle. 


IV 

The next item in this history of direct action which is worthy of 
mention relates to the entry in the famous Hindu Temple at Nasik known 
as the Kala Ram Temple. These are instances of direct action aimed to 
achieve specific objects. The movement includes two cases of direct action 
aimed at the demolition of the Hindu Social Order by applying dynamite 
to its very foundations. One is the burning of the Manu Smriti and the 
second is the mass refusal by the Untouchables to lift the dead catties 
belonging to the Hindus and to skin them. 

The Burning of Manu Smriti took place at Mahad on the 20th 
of December 1927. The function was a part of the campaign for 
establishing the right to take water from the Chawdar tank. The 
Burning of the Manu Smriti took place publicly and openly in a 
Conference of Untouchables. Before burning the Manu Smriti, the 
Conference passed certain resolutions. As these resolutions form a land 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


253 


THE REVOLT OF THE UNTOUCHABLES 253 

mark in the history of the movement of the Untouchables they are given 
below: 

“Resolution 1 . — Declaration of the rights of a Hindu. 

This conference is firmly of opinion that the present deplorable 
condition of the Hindu Community is only an illustration of how a 
community becomes fallen by reason of its tolerating social injustice, 
following erroneous religious beliefs and supporting economic wrongs. 
The fall of the Hindu community is due entirely to the fact that the 
masses have not cared to know what are the birth-rights of a human 
being and much less have they cared to see that they are recognised 
and not set at naught the base acts and deeds of selfish people. To 
know what are these birth-rights of man and to endeavour to see that 
they are not trampled upon in the struggle between man and man and 
class and class, are the sacred duties of every person. In order that 
every Hindu may not know what are in the opinion of the Conference 
the inalienable birthrights of man, this Conference resolves to issue the 
following proclamation containing a list thereof — 

( i ) All Hindus have the same social status from birth. This equality 
of social status is an attribute which they retain till death. There 
may be distinctions and differences between them in point of 
their functions in society. But that must not cause differences in 
their social status. This Conference is therefore opposed to any 
action — whether in the political, economic or social field of life — 
which would result in producing a difference in social status. 

( ii ) The ultimate aim of all political, economic or social changes 
should be to maintain intact the equal status of all Hindus. 
That being the view of the Conference, the Conference strongly 
disapproves of all literature of the Hindus, whether ancient or 
modern, which supports in any way the pernicious doctrine of 
inequality underlying the Hindu social system. 

(iii) All power is derived from the people. The privileges claimed by 
any class or individual have no validity if they are not granted 
by the people. This Conference therefore repudiates the social 
and religious privileges enjoyed by some classes of Hindus in as 
much as they are founded upon the Vedas, Smritis and Puranas 
and not upon the free consent of the people. 

(iv) Every person is entitled as his birth-right to liberty of action 
and speech. This liberty could be limited only for the purpose 
of saving the right of another person to his liberty and for no 
other purposes. Further this limitation can be imposed only 
with the sanction of the people and not by any injunction of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


254 


254 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the Hindu Shastras. This Conference therefore repudiates all 
restraints on religious, social and economic freedom imposed 
upon the thought and action of the Hindus in as much as they 
are imposed by the Shastras and not by the people. 

( v ) Hindus can be deprived of their rights other than their birth- 
rights only by law. What is not prohibited by law, a Hindu must 
be free to do and what is not obligatory by law, a Hindu must 
not be forced to do. For this reason there must be no obstruction 
to persons using public roads, public wells and tanks, public 
temples and all other public utilities. Persons, causing obstruction 
in matters where law has laid down no prohibition, are in the 
opinion of this Conference enemies of the public. 

(vi) Law is not a command of an individual or a body of individuals. 
Law is the peoples prescription for change. That being so, law to 
be respected, must be made with the consent of all and must have 
equal application to all without any distinction. Social divisions 
if they are necessary for the ends of society can only be made on 
the basis of worth and not of birth. This Conference repudiates 
the Hindu caste-system firstly as being detrimental to society, 
secondly as being based on birth and thirdly as being without 
any sanction from the people.” 

The Second Resolution passed by the Conference was worked as 
follows: 


“Resolution No. 2 . — Taking into consideration the fact that the 
laws which are proclaimed in the name of Manu, the Hindu lawgiver, 
and which are contained in the Manu Smriti and which are recognised 
as the Code for the Hindus are insulting to persons of low caste, 
are calculated to deprive them of the rights of a human being and 
crush their personality. Comparing them in the light of the rights 
of men recognised all over the civilized world, this conference is of 
opinion that this Manu Smriti is not entitled to any respect and 
is undeserving of being called a sacred book to show its deep and 
profound contempt for it, the Conference resolves to burn a copy 
thereof, at the end of the proceedings, as a protest against the system 
of social inequality it embodies in the guise of religion.” 

A cursory reading of these resolutions will show the line which 
the Conference adopted. Although the Conference met to redress 
a particular wrong, it showed that it was not going to be satisfied 
with the redress of petty wrongs. The Conference felt that the time 
had arrived for laying down the goal of the Untouchables. The goal 
laid down by it was far-reaching. The Conference proclaimed that 
the Untouchables wanted a complete overhauling of the Hindu social 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


255 


THE REVOLT OF THE UNTOUCHABLES 255 

system. It proclaimed that this reconstruction must not be on the 
old foundation of Shastras. It proclaimed that whatever character of 
the new foundations, they must be consonant with justice and equity 
between Hindu and Hindu and to leave no doubt that in the matter of 
this reconstruction, they would not consent to the Hindu shastras being 
drawn upon. The Conference not only repudiated them but actually went 
to the length of burning them to ashes. 

It was an echo of Voltare’s denunciation of the Catholic Church of 
his time. For the first time a cry was raised against the Hindu Social 
Order “Ecraze la Infame”. It is also clear that these resolutions were 
absolutely revolutionary in character. 

The rock on which the Hindu Social Order has been built is the 
Manu Smriti. It is a part of the Hindu Scriptures and is therefore sacred 
to all Hindus. Being sacred it is infallible. Every Hindu believes in its 
sanctity and obeys its injunctions. Manu not only upholds caste and 
untouchability but gives them a legal sanction. The burning of the Manu 
Smriti was a deed of great daring. It was an attack on the very citadel 
of Hinduism. The Manu Smriti embodied the spirit of inequality which 
is at the base of Hindu life and thought just as the Bastille was the 
embodiment of the spirit of the Ancient regime in France. The burning 
of the Manu Smriti by the Untouchables at Mahad in 1927 is an event 
which has the same significance and importance in the history of the 
emancipation of the Untouchables which the Fall of Bastille had in the 
liberation of the masses in France and Europe. 

The second instance of direct action against the frame of the Hindu 
Social Order itself is the refusal to skin the dead animals belonging to 
the Hindus and carrying them. 

One often hears the Untouchables being condemned for having 
brought upon themselves the curse of untouchability. The main ground 
on which this accusation rests is the adoption by the Untouchables as 
their occupation, the carrying of the dead animals of the Hindus and 
skinning them and eating the carrion. 

Even so great a friend of the downtrodden as the Abe. Dubois writing 
about the Pariahs of the Madras Presidency said: 

“What chiefly disgusts other natives is the revolting nature of 
the food which the Pariahs eat. Attracted by the smell, they will 
collect in crowds round any carrion and contend for the spoil with 
the dogs, jackals, crows and other carnivorous animals. They then 
divide the semi-putrid flesh and carry it away to their huts, where 
they devour it, often without rice or anything else to disguise 
the flavour. That the animal should have died of disease is of no 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


256 


256 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

consequence to them, and they sometimes secretly poison cows or 
buffaloes so that they may subsequently feast on the foul, putrifying 
remains. The carcasses of animal’s that die in a village belong by 
right to the thoti or scavenger, who sells the flesh at a very low price 
to the other Pariahs in the neighbourhood. When it is impossible 
to consume in one day the stock of meat thus obtained, they dry 
the remainder in the sun, and keep it in their huts until they run 
short of their food. There are few Pariah houses where one does not 
see festoons of these horrible fragments hanging up; and though 
the Pariahs themselves do not seem to be affected by the smell, 
travellers passing near their village quickly perceive it and can tell 
at once the caste of the people living there.... 

Is it to be wondered at, after what has been just stated that 
other castes should hold this in abhorrence? Can they be blamed 
for refusing to hold any communication with such savages, or for 
obliging them to keep themselves aloof and to live in the separate 
hamlets? ” 

It is true that this occupation has created a feeling of repugnance 
against the Untouchables in the mind of the Hindus. But the Abe or those 
who adopt his reasoning forget to raise two very important questions. 
First is why do the Untouchables eat carrion? Will the Hindus allow the 
Untouchables the freedom to give up skinning and carrying their dead 
animals? The answer to the question why the Untouchables eat carrion 
has already been given in a previous chapters. 

No one would prefer carrion to flesh meat if it is available. If the 
Untouchables have been living on carrion it is not because they like it. 
They eat carrion, because there is nothing else on which they can live. 
This will be clear to anyone who realizes that on account of untouchability 
they have no way left to earn a living. All professions have been closed 
to them. There is no land on the produce of which they can live. There 
is no trade which they can engage in. Their main stay is therefore the 
food they collect from the villagers and the carrion which is left to them. 
Without carrion they would literally die of starvation. It is therefore clear 
that the fault does not lie with the Untouchables. If the Untouchables 
eat carrion it is because the Hindus have left no honourable way of 
earning a living open to them. 

To the second question the answer is equally clear. If the 
Untouchables skin and carry the dead animals of the Hindus, it is 
because the Untouchables have no choice. They are forced to do it. 
They would be penalized if they refused to do it. The penalty is legal. 
In some provinces the refusal to do this dirty work is a breach of 
contract. In other provinces it is a criminal offence involving fines. In 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


257 


THE REVOLT OF THE UNTOUCHABLES 257 

Provinces like Bombay the Untouchables are village servants. In their 
capacity as village servants they have to serve the Government as well 
as the Hindu public. In return for this service they are given lands which 
they cultivate and on the produce of which they maintain themselves. 
One of the duties of the Untouchables is to skin and carry the dead 
animals of the Hindus in the villages. If the Untouchables refuse to 
perform these duties to the Hindu public, the land which they live on 
is liable to be confiscated. They have to choose between doing the dirty 
work or facing starvation. 

In Provinces like the United Provinces, refusal to do scavenging by 
sweeper is made an offence. The United Provinces Municipalities Act II 
of 1916 contains the following provisions: 

Section 201(1 ). — “Should a sweeper who has a customary right 
to do the house-scavenging of a house of building (hereinafter called 
the customary sweeper) fail to perform such scavenging in a proper 
way, the occupier of the house or building or the board may complain 
to a Magistrate.” 

(2) “The Magistrate receiving such complaint shall hold an 
inquiry and should it appear to him that the customary sweeper 
has failed to perform the house-scavenging of the house or building 
in a proper way or at a reasonable intervals, he may impose upon 
such a sweeper a fine which may extend to ten rupees, and upon 
a second or any later conviction in regard to the same house or 
building, may also direct, the right of the customary sweeper to 
do the house scavenging the house or building to be forfeited and 
thereupon such right shall be forfeited.” 

Exactly similar provision is to be found in Section 165 of the Punjab 
Municipalities Act of 1911. The Punjab Act is an advance over the U. 
P. Act, in as much as it provides for punishment of a sweeeper who is 
not customary sweeper but a contract-sweeper. The Punjab Act adds: 

“(3) Should any sweeper (other than a customary sweeper), who 
is under a contract to do house-scavenging of a house or a building, 
discontinue to do such house-scavenging without fourteen days’ notice 
to his employer or without reasonable cause, he shall on conviction 
be punishable with a fine which may extend to Rs. ten.” 

“227. Every order of forfeiture under Section 165 shall be subject 
to an appeal to the next superior court, but shall not be otherwise 
open to appeal.” 

People may be shocked to read that there exists legal provision 
which sanctions forced labour. Beyond doubt, this is slavery. The 
difference between slavery and free labour lies in this. Under slavery 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


258 


258 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a breach of contract of service is an offence which is punishable with 
fine or imprisonment. Under free labour a breach of contract of service 
is only a civil wrong for which the labourer is liable only for damages. 
Judged in the light of this criterion, scavenging is a legal obligation 
imposed upon the Untouchables which they cannot escape. 

Given these conditions, how can the Untouchables be accused of 
doing these dirty work voluntarily? 

The question whether the Untouchables can be accused of having 
invited the curse of untouchability upon themselves for doing the dirty 
work of the Hindus is really beside the point. What is important to note 
is that the Conference of the Untouchables which met in Mahad resolved 
that no Untouchable shall skin the dead animals of the Hindus, shall 
carry it or eat the carrion. The object of these resolutions was two-fold. 
The one abject was to foster among the Untouchables self-respect and 
self-esteem. This was a minor object. The major object was to strike a 
blow at the Hindu Social Order. The Hindu Social Order is based upon a 
division of labour which reserves for the Hindus clean and respectable jobs 
and assigns to the Untouchables dirty and mean jobs and thereby clothes 
the Hindus with dignity and heaps ignominy upon the Untouchables. 
The resolution was a revolt against this part of the Hindu Social Order. 
It aimed at making the Hindus do their dirty jobs themselves. 

This is a brief summery of the history of the revolt of the Untouchables 
against the established order of the Hindu. It originated in Bombay. But 
it has spread to all parts of India. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


259 


Chapter 22 

HELD AT BAY 


I. Hindu reaction to the revolt of the untouchables. 

II. Lawless means for ruthless repression. III. 
Untouchables, a weak force. IV. Officers who are 
shameless partisans. V. A weapon which is made blunt. 

I 

The story of the revolt of the Untouchables tells how the old is ringing 
out and the new is ringing in. What is the reaction of the Hindus to this 
revolt? No one who knows anything about it can have any hesitation 
in answering this question. For it is clear that his attitude is one of 
opposition. It might be difficult to understand why the Hindus should 
oppose. But there can be no manner of doubt that he is opposed. 

The reasons why the Hindus are opposed to this fight for rights of 
the untouchables for their rights will not be difficult to understand if 
certain important features of the relationship that is now subsisting 
between the Caste Hindus and the Untouchables are borne in mind. 

The first and foremost consideration that must never be forgotten is 
the sharp division between the Touchables and the Untouchables. Every 
village has two parts, the quarters of the Touchables and quarters of the 
Untouchables. Geographically the two are separate. There is always an 
appreciable distance between the two. At any rate there is no contiguity or 
proximity between them. The Untouchables have a distinct name for their 
quarters such as Maharwada, Mangwada, Chamrotti, Khaykana, etc. De 
Jure for the purposes of revenue administration or postal communication 
the quarters of the Untouchables are included in the village. But de facto 
it is separate from the village. When the Hindu resident of a village speaks 
of the village he means to include in it only the Caste Hindu residents 
and the locality occupied by them. Similarly when the Untouchable 
speaks of the village he means to exclude from it the Untouchables and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


260 


260 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the quarters they occupy. Thus, in every village the Touchables and 
Untouchables form two separate groups. There is nothing common 
between them. They do not constitute a folk. This is the first thing 
which must be noted. 

The second thing to note with regard to this division of the village 
into two groups is that these groups are real corporations which, no one 
included within them, can escape. As has been well said the American 
or European belongs to groups of various kinds, but he “joins” most of 
them. He of course is born into a family, but he does not stay in it all 
his life unless he pleases. He may choose his own occupation, residence, 
wife, political party, and is responsible, generally speaking, for no one’s 
acts but his own. He is an “individual” in a much fuller sense because 
all his relationships are settled by himself for himself. The Touchables 
or Untouchables are in no sense individuals because all or nearly all 
of their relationships are fixed when they are born in a certain group. 
Their occupation, their dwelling, their gods and their politics are all 
determined for them by the group to which they belong. When the 
Touchables and Untouchables meet, they meet not as man to man, 
individual to individual, but as members of groups or as nationals of 
two different states. 

This fact has an important effect upon the mutual relationship 
between the Touchables and Untouchables in a village. The relationship 
resembles the relationship between different clans in primitive society. In 
primitive society the member of the clan has a claim, but the stranger 
has no standing. He may be treated kindly, as a guest, but he cannot 
demand “justice” at the hands of any clan but his own. The dealing of 
clan with clan is a matter of war or negotiations, not of law; and the 
clanless man is an outlaw, in fact as well as in name, and lawlessness 
against the stranger is therefore lawful. The Untouchable, not being a 
member of the group of Touchables, is a stranger. He is not a kindred. 
He is an outlaw. He cannot claim justice nor any rights which the 
Touchable is bound to respect. 

The third thing to note is that the relationship between the two, 
the Touchables and the Untouchables, has been fixed. It has become a 
matter of status. This status has unmistakably given the Untouchables 
a position of inferiority vis-a-vis the Touchables. This inferiority 
is embodied in a code of social conduct to which the Untouchables 
must conform. What kind of code it is, has already been stated. The 
Untouchable is not willing to conform to that code. He is not prepared 
to render unto Caesar what is claimed by Caesar. The Untouchable 
wants to have his relationship with the Touchables by contract. The 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


261 


HELD AT BAY 261 

Touchable wants the Untouchables to live in accordance with the rules 
of status and not rise above it. Thus, the two halves of the village, the 
Touchables and the Untouchables, are now struggling for resettling what 
the Touchable thinks is settled for ever. The conflict is centered round 
one question — What is to be the basis of this relationship? Shall it be 
contract or shall it be status? 

That is the question which is agitating the Hindus. The Hindu does 
not look at the revolt of the Untouchables as an attempt on the part 
of the latter for social and economic improvement of their people. He 
looks at it as an attempt directed against him, an attempt to equalize. 
That is why he is opposed. 


II 

The opposition of the Hindus is a determined opposition bent on 
stamping out the revolt at any cost. In this, they are prepared to use 
any means and to go to any length. This revolt of the Untouchables has 
been met with equally determined attack on the part of the Hindus. How 
cruel the Hindus can be in suppressing this revolt of the Untouchables 
will appear from one or two cases. 

On the occasion of the entry of the Untouchables in the Chawdar 
Tank at Mahad, in the exercise of their right to take water from a 
public place, the assault made upon the Untouchables who had attended 
the Conference and taken part in the march upon the Tank has been 
described in the Bombay Chronicle in the following terms: 

“The procession was a most peaceful one and everything passed 
off quietly. But after about two hours some evil minded leaders of 
the town raised a false rumour that the depresssed classes were 
planning to enter the temple of Vireshwar, whereupon a large 
crowd of riffraff had collected all armed with bamboo sticks. The 
crowd soon became aggressive and the whole town at once became 
a surging mass of rowdies, who seemed to be out for the blood of 
the depressed classes. 

The depressed classes were busy in taking their meal before 
dispersing to their village. When a large part of them had left the 
town, the rowdies entered the kitchen where the depressed classes 
were taking their food. There would have been a regular battle 
between the two forces, but the depressed classes were held back 
by their leaders, and thus a far more serious riot was averted. The 
rowdies, finding no occasion for provocation, began patrolling the 
main street and assaulting the members of the depressed classes 
who, in stray batches, were passing along on their way to their 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


262 


262 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


villages, and committed trespass in the houses of several depressed 
class people and gravely assaulted them. In all, the number 
of wounded among the depressed classes is supposed to be as 
large as 20. In this, the attitude of the Depressed classes was as 
commendable as the attitude of many of the upper classes was 
unworthy. The depressed classes assembled vastly outnumbered the 
upper classes. But as the object of their leaders was to do everything 
in a non-violent and absolutely constitutional manner, they set 
their faces against any aggression on the part of the depressed 
classes. It speaks a great deal in favour of the depressed classes, 
that, although the provocation given to them was immense, they 
kept their self control. The Mahad Conference has shown that 
the upper classes are not willing to allow the depressed classes 
to enjoy such elementary civic rights as taking water from public 
water sources. 

The most reprehensible part of the conduct of the upper 
caste Hindus in Mahad and Kolaba district was that, messages 
were sent immediately to the different villages asking the upper 
class people there to punish the delegates of the Conference as 
soon as they returned to their respective villages. In obedience to 
this mandate, assaults were committed on a number of Mahars 
returning from the Conference either before or after they reached 
their villages, where the depressed classes have the disadvantage 
of being overwhelmingly outnumbered by the upper caste Hindus. 

The leaders of the Depressed Classes have appealed to the 
authorities for protection and the District officials, including the 
District Superintendent of Police are making inquiries on the spot. 

It must, however be stated that, if the Resident Magistrate had 
not allowed two precious hours to pass without doing anything, 
the riot would have probably been averted.” 

The assault committed on the Untouchables as a result of the 
Kalaram Temple Satyagraha was no less severe. 

The third instance is more recent and occurred in the year 1935 
in the village of Kavitha in Dholka Taluka of the Ahmedabad District 
of the Bombay Presidency. 

The Bombay Government having issued orders requiring the 
admission of the children of the Untouchables in public schools, it is 
reported that 1 : 

“On August 8th, 1935, the Untouchables of the village Kavitha 
took four of their children to be admitted in the village school. 
Many caste Hindus from the village had gathered near the school to 

1 This account of the incident is a translation of the Statement sent to me by the 
Secretary of the Nava Yuga Mandal of Dholka. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


263 


HELD AT BAY 263 

witness this. This occasion for admission passed off quietly and 

nothing untoward happened.” 

The next day however the caste Hindus of the village withdrew their 
children from the school, as they did not like their children sitting with 
those of the Untouchables and getting themselves polluted. 

Some time thereafter, an Untouchable from the village was assaulted 
by a Brahmin. On August 12th, the male members of the Untouchables 
of the village had come to Dholka to file a criminal complaint against 
the Brahmin in the Court of the Magistrate. Coming to know that the 
adult members of the Untouchables were absent, the Hindus of the village 
invaded the quarters of the Untouchables. They were armed with sticks, 
spears and swords. Among the invaders were caste Hindu women. They 
started attacking the old men and women of the Untouchables. Some 
of these victims fled to the jungles, some shut themselves up. These 
invaders directed their vehemance against those Untouchables who were 
suspected of having taken a lead in the matter of the admission of their 
children in the village school. They broke open their doors and not finding 
them in, they broke the tiles and rafters of the roofs over their houses. 

Terror-stricken, these Untouchable men and women who are assaulted 
and beaten were anxious about the safety of those of their elders who 
had gone to Dholka and who were expected back that night. The caste 
Hindus knowing that the leaders of the Untouchables who had gone to 
Dholka would be returning sometime in the night, went out of the village 
fully armed to assault them and had concealed themselves behind the 
bushes and shrubs on the way to the village. Having come to know of 
this, an old Untouchable woman crept out of the village in the dark, 
met the leaders who were returning and informed them that armed 
gangs of caste Hindus were hiding themselves to waylay them and that 
therefore they should not come into the village. They refused to listen, 
fearing that the caste Hindus might do greater mischief in their absence. 
At the same time they were afraid that if they did enter they might 
be assaulted. They therefore decided to wait outside the village in the 
fields till after midnight. In the meantime, the gang of caste Hindus who 
were in ambush waited and waited and finally gave up the game and 
retired. The leaders of the Untouchables entered the village after about 
3 a.m. in the night. If they had come earlier and met the murderous 
gang they would probably have been done to death. On seeing the harm 
done to person and property, they left the village for Ahmedabad before 
day break and informed the Secretary of the Harijan Seva Sangh, a body 
organized by Gandhi to look after the welfare of the Untouchables. But the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


264 


264 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Secretary was helpless. Not only did the caste Hindus use physical 
violence, but they conspired to make the life of the Untouchables 
intolerable. They refused to engage them as labourers; they refused 
to sell them foodstuff. They refused to give them facilities for grazing 
their cattle and they committed stray assaults on Untouchable men 
and women. Not only this, but the caste Hindus in their frenzy poured 
kerosene oil in the well from which the Untouchables had to get their 
supply of drinking water. This they did for days together. The result was 
that the Untouchables of the village had no water. When things reached 
this stage, the Untouchables thought of filing a criminal complaint before 
a Magistrate which they did on 17th October, making some of the caste 
Hindus as the accused. 

The strange part of the case is the part played by Gandhi and his 
Lieutenant, Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel. With all the knowledge of tyranny 
and oppression practised by the caste Hindus of Kavitha against the 
Untouchables, all that Mr. Gandhi felt like doing, was to advise the 
Untouchables to leave the village. He did not even suggest that the 
miscreants should be hauled up before a Court of Law. His henchman, 
Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel, played a part which was still more strange. He 
had gone to Kavitha to persuade the caste Hindus not to molest the 
Untouchables. But they did not even give him a hearing. Yet this very 
man was opposed to the Untouchables hauling them up in a court of 
law and getting them punished. The Untouchables filed the complaint 
notwithstanding his opposition. But he ultimately forced them to 
withdraw the complaint against the caste Hindus making some kind 
of a show of an undertaking not to molest, an undertaking which the 
Untouchables can never enforce. The result was that the Untouchables 
suffered and their tyrants escaped with the aid of Mr. Gandhi’s friend, 
Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel. 

This systematic suppression of the Untouchables is resorted to by 
the caste Hindus even in small matters such as the wearing of better 
clothes or the wearing of jewellery. Two such instances may be cited. 

Ill 

To whom the victory will go in the end is an interesting speculation, 
and those who are leading the movement of the Untouchables, are carefully 
watching the situation. Whatever the ultimate result, one thing is plain, 
that in this struggle, the odds are heavily against the Untouchables. 

In this conflict with the Hindus, the Untouchables are always at bay. 
As against caste lawlessness, the Untouchables are always helpless. The 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


265 


HELD AT BAY 265 

question is, why are the Untouchables always beaten, why are they 
always at bay? The question is an important question and needs to 
be answered. 

The reasons why the Untouchables are at bay in this struggle with 
the caste Hindus are quite obvious. The first reason is that the two 
groups are unequally matched so far as numbers are concerned. In no 
village do the Untouchables constitute a considerable body of people as 
compared with the Caste Hindus. Most often they are composed of a 
few families and their number is very small, too small to give them any 
power to repel an attack of the caste Hindus. Although the Untouchables 
number 50 millions, which appears in lump to be a formidable figure, 
in fact they are scattered all over the villages in India so that in each 
village they form a small minority pitted against a great majority of the 
caste Hindus. Strategically speaking the forces are so badly distributed 
that they cannot but be overwhelmed by the caste Hindus. 

The Mahomedans in the village of some provinces are in the same 
position as the Untouchables so far as numbers are concerned. They 
are also scattered throughout the villages and in some villages the 
population of the Mahomedans is much smaller than the population 
of the Untouchables. Yet the Mahomedans are not subjected by the 
Hindus to the disabilities and the indignities to which the Untouchables 
are subjected. This is rather strange, because there is as deep an 
antagonism between the Hindus and the Muslims as there is between 
the Hindus and the Untouchables. This difference in treatment is due 
to an advantage which the Muslims have but which the Untouchables 
do not have. 

It was a rule in all ancient societies that a stranger was sacred. 
His person must be guarded from insult and injury. The Romans had 
their dii hospitales and the duties towards a stranger were even more 
stringent than those towards a relative. “ He who has a spark of caution 
in him,” says Plato “will do his best to pass this life without sinning 
against the stranger.” It is strange that so much sanctity should have 
been attached to the person of a stranger. There is no doubt that this 
sanctity of the stranger’s person was not due to pure kindness. The whole 
conduct of group life is opposed to a general spirit of consideration for 
those who are outside the group. The real reason why the stranger was 
treated as sacred and his person inviolate was because he belonged to 
a hostile group, and any injury to him was sure to lead to bloodshed. 
It was the fear of a blood feud which was the cause of this attitude 
towards the stranger. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


266 


266 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The same thing applies to the Mahomedan in a village. In the eyes 
of the Hindus he is a stranger. But the Hindus dare not molest him 
because they know that any injury to him will be avenged by Muslims in 
a blood feud with the Hindus. The communal riots between the Hindus 
and Mahomedans are really blood feuds and they are caused by some 
injury done to a Mahomedan or to some Mahomedan interests. It is 
this fear of a blood feud which makes the life of a Muslim in a Hindu 
village safe. 

There is nobody to avenge an injury done to an Untouchable. There 
is no fear of a blood feud. The Hindus therefore can commit any wrong 
against the Untouchables with impunity. This is because the Mahomedans 
are a solid mass, held together with a deep consciousness of kind, ready 
to act as one man to vindicate any wrong to the community or to a 
member thereof. The Untouchables, on the other hand, are a disunited 
body, they are infested with the caste system in which they believe as 
much as does the caste Hindu. This caste system among the Untouchables 
has given rise to mutual rivalry and jealousy and it has made common 
action impossible. The Mahomedans have also a caste system among 
themselves. Like the Untouchables they are also scattered all over the 
country. But their religion is a strong unifying force which gives them the 
feeling that, if they are parts, they are parts of one Muslim Community. 
There is nothing to instil such a feeling among the Untouchables. In 
the absence of any unifying force, the Untouchables are just fragments 
with no cement to bind them and their numbers are therefore of no 
advantage to them. 

A large majority of the Untouchables in the villages are either village 
servants or landless labourers. As village servants, they depend upon 
the Hindus for their maintenance, and go from door to door every day 
and collect bread or cooked food from the Hindus in return for certain 
customary services rendered by them to the Hindus. This is a part of their 
remuneration. A part also of their remuneration consists in quantities 
of grain given to them by the Hindus at the harvest time. Whenever 
there is a disagreement between the Hindus and the Untouchables, the 
first thing the Hindus do is to stop giving bread, stop the payment of 
the harvest share and stop employing the Untouchables on any job. The 
result is that the struggling hoards of the Untouchables are face to face 
with starvation. 

The Untouchables have no way of earning a living open to them in 
a village. He cannot do any business such as selling milk or vegetables. 
Because he is an Untouchable no one will buy these things from him. 
He cannot take to any trade because, all trades being hereditary, no 
one will accept his service. His economic dependence upon the Hindu 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


267 


HELD AT BAY 267 

is complete and the Hindu takes a complete advantage of it whenever the 
Untouchables prove arrogant, or naughty in the eyes of the Touchables. 

Not only is the Untouchable dependent upon the Touchable for 
earning his livelihood but the Untouchable is also dependent upon the 
Touchables for the purchase of his necessaries of life. In a village all 
shops belong to the Touchables. Trade is, and must necessarily be, in 
the hands of the Touchables. An Untouchable has to depend upon the 
Touchable shopkeepers for their shopping. If the Touchable shopkeeper is 
willing to sell, the Untouchables can obtain the necessaries of life. If the 
shopkeeper refuses to sell, the Untouchable must starve although they 
might have money to live on. Now whenever any dispute arises between 
the Touchables and the Untouchables the one thing the Touchables 
never fail to do is to command the shopkeepers not to sell anything to 
the Untouchables. The Touchables constitute an organized conspiracy to 
bring about a cessation of all economic relationship with Untouchables. 
A war is proclaimed against the Untouchables. The means used for 
reducing the “enemy” is to send a “punitive expedition” consisting of 
rascals into the Untouchable quarters who ruthlessly carry on arson of 
destruction of property and shamelessly commit acts of violence against 
all including women and children. 

The more common and the more effective weapons is the declaration 
of complete boycott against the offending Untouchables. The horrors of 
the boycott, which is merely another name for Gandhi’s “non-cooperation”, 
can hardly be adequately described. The Committee appointed by the 
Government of Bombay to inquire into the grievances of the Backward 
Classes speaks of the social boycott in the following terms: 

“Although we have recommended various remedies to secure to 
the Untouchables their rights to all public utilities we fear that there 
will be difficulties in the way of their exercising them for a long 
time to come. The first difficulty is the fear of open violence against 
them by the orthodox classes. It must be noted that the Untouchables 
are a small minority in every village, opposed to which is a great 
majority of the orthodox who are bent on protecting their interests 
and dignity from any supposed invasion by the Untouchables at any 
cost. The danger of prosecution by the police has put a limitation 
upon the use of violence by the orthodox classes and consequently 
such cases are rare. 

The second difficulty arises from the economic position in which 
the Untouchables are found today. The Untouchables have no 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


268 


268 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

economic independence in most parts of the Presidency. Some 
cultivate lands of the orthodox classes as their tenants at will. 
Others live on their earnings as farm labourers employed by the 
orthodox classes, and the rest subsist on the food or grain given 
to them by the orthodox classes in lieu of service rendered to 
them as village servants. We have heard of numerous instances 
where the orthodox classes have used their economic power as a 
weapon against those Depressed classes in their villages, when the 
latter have dared to exercise their rights and have evicted them 
from their land, and stopped their employment and discontinued 
their remuneration as village servants. The boycott is often 
planned on such an extensive scale as to include the prevention 
of the Untouchables from using the commonly used paths and the 
stoppage of the sale of the necessaries of life by the village bania 
or shopkeeper. According to the evidence small causes suffice for 
the proclamation of a social boycott against the Untouchables. 
Frequently it follows on the exercise by the Untouchables of their 
right to the use of the common well, but cases have been by no 
means rare where stringent boycott has been proclaimed simply 
because an Untouchable man has put on a sacred thread, has 
bought a piece of land, has put on good clothes or ornaments, or 
has led a marriage procession with the bride-groom on the horse 
through the public street. 

We do not know of any weapon more effective than this social 
boycott which could have been invented for the suppression of the 
Untouchables. The method of open violence pales away before it, 
for it has the most far reaching and deadening effects. It is the 
more dangerous because it passes as a lawful method consistent 
with the theory of freedom of contract. We agree that this tyranny 
of the majority must be put down with a firm hand if we are to 
guarantee to the Untouchables the freedom of speech and action 
necessary for their uplift.” 


IV 

The third circumstance which adds to the helplessness of the 
Untouchables is the impossibility for the Untouchables to obtain any 
protection from the police or justice from the courts. The police are 
drawn from the ranks of the caste Hindus. The Magistracy is drawn 
from the ranks of the Caste Hindus. The police and the magistracy 
are the kith and kin of the caste Hindus. They share the sentiments 
and the prejudices of the caste Hindus against the Untouchables. If an 
Untouchable goes to a police officer with a complaint against the caste 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


269 


HELD AT BAY 269 

Hindus instead of receiving any protection he will receive plenty of 
abuse. Either he will be driven away without his complaint being 
recorded or, if it is recorded, it would be recorded quite falsely to 
provide a way of escape to the Touchable aggressors. If he prosecutes 
his offenders before a Magistrate the fate of his proceedings could be 
foretold. He will never get Touchable witnesses because of the conspiracy 
of the villagers. If he brings witnesses from the Untouchables the 
Magistrate will not accept their testimony because they are interested 
and not independent witnesses or, if they are independent witnesses, 
the Magistrate has an easy way of acquitting the accused by simply 
saying that the complainant Untouchable did not strike him as a 
truthful witness. He can do this fearlessly because he knows full well 
that the higher tribunal will not reverse his finding because of the 
well-established rule which says that an appellate court should’ not 
disturb the finding of a Magistrate based upon the testimony of witness 
whose demeanour he had observed. This fact has now been admitted 
even by Congress workers among the Untouchables. 

The Annual Report of the Tamil Nad Harijan Sevak Sangh for the 
year ending September 30, 1937, says: “The political consciousness of 
the Harijan having been roused by the rights, in the remotest villages 
where it is only the policeman that reigns, it is not always possible 
for the Harijan to do this, for the assertion of his rights means a 
clash between him and the castemen, in which it is always the latter 
that have the upper hand. The natural consequence of this scuffle is 
a complaint either to the police or the magistrate. The latter course 
is beyond the means of a Harijan, while the former resort is worse 
than useless. The complaints are in many cases not inquired into at 
all, while in others a verdict favourable to the castemen is entered. 
Our complaints to the police also meet with similar fate. The trouble 
seems to us to be this: there is no change in the mentality of the 
lower policemen. Either he is unaware of the rights of the Harijans 
of which he is supposed to be the guardian, or he is influenced by 
castemen. Or it may also be that he is absolutely indifferent. In other 
cases corruption is responsible for this taking the side of the richer 
castemen”. (Hindu, March 7, 1938). 

This means that the official is anti-Untouchable and pro-Hindu. 
Whenever he has any authority or discretion it is always exercised to 
the prejudice of the Untouchable. 

The police and the magistrate are sometimes corrupt. If they were 
only corrupt, things would not perhaps be so bad because an officer 
who is corrupt is open to purchase by either party. But the additional 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


270 


270 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

misfortune is that the police and magistrates are often more partial 
than corrupt. It is this partiality to the Hindus and his antipathy to the 
Untouchables which results in the denial of protection and justice to the 
Untouchables. There is no cure to this partiality to the one and antipathy 
to the other. It is founded in the social and religious repugnance which 
is inborn in every Hindu. The police and the Magistrate by reason of 
their motives, interest and their breeding do not sympathize with the 
living forces operating among the Untouchables. They are not charged 
with the wants, the pains, the cravings and the desires which actuate 
the Untouchables. Consequently they are openly hostile and inimical 
to their aspirations, do not help them to advance, disfavour their cause 
and snap at everything that smacks of pride and self respect. On the 
other hand they share the feelings of the Hindus, sympathize with 
them in the attempt to maintain their power, authority, prestige and 
their dignity over the Untouchables. In any conflict between the two 
they act as the agents of the Hindus in suppressing this revolt of the 
Untouchables and participate quite openly and without shame in the 
nefarious attempt of all Hindus to do everything possible by all means, 
fair or foul, to “teach the Untouchables a lesson”, and hold them down 
in their own place. 

The worst of it is that all this injustice and persecution can be 
perpetrated within the limits of the law. A Hindu may well say that 
he will not employ an Untouchable, that he will not sell him anything, 
that he will evict him from his land, that he will not allow him to take 
his cattle across his field, without offending the law in the slightest 
degree. In doing this he is only exercising his right. The law does not 
care with what motive he does it. The law does not see what injury 
it causes to the Untouchable. The police may misuse his power and 
his authority. He may deliberately falsify the record by taking down 
something which has not been stated or by taking down something 
which is quite different from what has been stated. He may disclose 
evidence to the side in which he is interested. He may refuse to arrest. 
He may do a hundred and one things to spoil the case. All this he can 
do without the slightest fear of being brought to book. The loopholes 
of law are many, and he knows them well. The magistrate has vested 
in him an enormous amount of discretion. He is free to use it. The 
decision of a case depends upon the witnesses who can give evidence. 
But the decision of the case depends upon whether the witnesses are 
reliable or not. It is open to the magistrate to believe one side and 
disbelieve the other side. He may be quite arbitrary in believing one 
side, but it is his discretion, and no one can interfere with it. There are 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


271 


HELD AT BAY 271 

innumerable cases in which this discretion has been exercised by the 
Magistrate to the prejudice of the Untouchables. However truthful the 
witnesses of the Untouchables, the magistrates have taken a common 
line by saying “ I disbelieve the witnesses”, and no body has questioned 
that discretion. What sentence to inflict is also a matter of discretion 
with the magistrate. There are sentences which are appealable and there 
are sentences which are non-appealable. An appeal is a way of getting 
redress. But this way may be blocked by a magistrate by refusing to 
give an appealable sentence. 

Such are the forces which are arrayed against the struggling 
Untouchables. There is simply no way to overcome them because there 
is no legal way of punishing a whole society which is organized to set 
aside the law. 


V 

One way of lessening these difficulties — they certainly cannot be 
overcome — was open to the Untouchables. That way lay through politics 
and through effective use of political power. But in this matter the 
Untouchables have been foiled. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


272 


Chapter 23 

THEIR WISHES ARE LAWS UNTO US 

I. Adharma for Dharma. II. Manu and Dharma. 

III. Modern Counterparts. IV. Effect of Dharma on character 

and outlook. 

Any one who reads of the lawlessness of the Hindus in suppressing 
the movement of the untouchables, I am sure will be shocked. Why does 
the Hindu indulge in this lawlessness is a question he is sure to ask 
and none will say that such a question will not be a natural question 
and in the circumstances of the case a very pertinent question — Why 
should an untouchable be tyrannized if he wears clean clothes ? How 
can it hurt a Hindu. Why should an untouchable be molested because 
he wants to put a tiled roof on his house ? How can it injure a Hindu? 
Why should an untouchable be persecuted because he is keen to send 
his childen to school? How does a Hindu suffer thereby? Why should an 
untouchable be compelled to carry dead animals, eat carrion, and beg 
his food from door to door? Where is the loss to the Hindu if he gives 
these things up. Why should a Hindu object if an untouchable desires 
to change his religion ? Why should his conversion annoy and upset 
a Hindu? Why should a Hindu feel outraged if an untouchable calls 
himself by a decent, respectable name? How can a good name taken 
by an untouchable adversely affect the Hindu? Why should the Hindu 
object if an untouchable builds his house facing the main road? How 
can he suffer thereby? Why should the Hindu object if the sound made 
by an untouchable falls upon his ears on certain days? It cannot deafen 
him. Why should a Hindu feel resentment if an untouchable enters a 
profession, obtains a position of authority, buys land, enters commerce, 
becomes economically independent and is counted among the well-to-do ? 
Why should all Hindus whether officials or non-officials make common 
cause to suppress the untouchables? Why should all castes otherwise 
quarreling among themselves combine to make, in the name Hinduism, 
a conspiracy to hold the untouchables at bay? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


273 


THEIR WISHER ARE LAWS UNTO US 273 

All this of course sounds like a fiction. But one who has read the 
tales of Hindu tyranny recounted in the last chapter will know that 
beneath these questions there is the foundation of facts. The facts, of 
course, are stranger than fiction. But the strangest thing is that these 
deeds are done by Hindus who are ordinarily timid even to the point 
of being called cowards. The Hindus are ordinarily a very soft people. 
They have none of the turbulence or virulence of the Muslims. But, when 
so soft a people resort without shame and without remorse to pillage, 
loot, arson and violence on men, women and children, one is driven to 
believe that there must be a deeper compelling cause which maddens 
the Hindus on witnessing this revolt of the untouchables and leads them 
to resort to such lawlessness. 

There must be some explanation for so strange, so inhuman a way 
of acting. What is it? 

If you ask a Hindu, why he behaves in this savage manner, why 
he feels outraged by the efforts which the untouchables are making for 
a clean and respectable life, his answer will be a simple one. He will 
say: “What you call the reform by the untouchables is not a reform. 
It is an outrage on our Dharma”. If you ask him further where this 
Dharma of his is laid down, his answer will again be a very simple one. 
He will reply, “Our Dharma is contained in our Shastras”. A Hindu in 
suppressing what, in the view of an unbiased man, is a just revolt of 
the untouchables against a fundamentally wrong system by violence, 
pillage, arson, and loot, to a modern man appears to be acting quite 
irreligiously, or, to use the term familiar to the Hindus, he is practising 
Adharma. But the Hindu will never admit it. The Hindu believes that 
it is the untouchables who are breaking the Dharma and his acts of 
lawlessness which appear as Adharma are guided by his sacred duty to 
restore Dharma. This is an answer, the truth of which cannot be denied 
by those who are familiar with the psychology of the Hindus. But this 
raises a further question: What are these Dharma which the Shastras 
have prescribed and what rules of social relationship do they ordain ? 

II 

The word Dharma is of Sanskrit origin. It is one of those Sanskrit 
words which defy all attempts at an exact definition. In ancient 
times the word was used in different senses although analogous in 
connotation. It would be interesting to see how the word Dharma passed 
through transitions of meaning 1 . But this is hardly the place for it. 
It is sufficient to say that the word dharma soon acquired a definite 

1 See P. V. Kane — History of Dharma Shastra, pp. 1-2. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


274 


274 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

meaning which leaves no doubt as to what it connotes. The word Dharma 
means the privileges, duties and obligations of a man, his standard of 
conduct as a member of the Hindu community, as a member of one of 
the castes, and as a person in a particular stage of life. 

The principal sources of Dharma, it is agreed by all Hindus, are the 
Vedas, the Smritis and customs. Between the Vedas and Smritis, so 
far as Dharma is concerned, there is however this difference. The rules 
of Dharma, as we see them in their developed form, have undoubtedly 
their roots in the Vedas, and it is therefore justifiable to speak of the 
Vedas as the source of Dharma. But the Vedas do not profess to be 
formal treatises on Dharma. They do not contain positive precepts 
( Vidhis ) on matters of Dharma in a connected form. They contain only 
disconnected statements on certain topics concerned with Dharma. On 
the other hand, Smritis are formal treatises on Dharma. They contain 
enactments as to the Dharma. They form the law of the Dharma in 
the real sense of the term. Disputes as to what is Dharma and what is 
not Dharma (Adharma) can be decided only by reference to the text of 
the law as given in the Smritis. The Smritis form, therefore, the real 
source of what the Hindu calls Dharma, and, as they are the authority 
for deciding which is Dharma and which is not, the Smritis are called 
Dharmashastras (scriptures) which prescribe the rules of Dharma. 

The number of Smritis which have come down from ancient times 
have been variously estimated. The lowest number is five and the highest 
a hundred. What is important to bear in mind is that all these Smritis 
are not equal in authority. Most of them are obscure. Only a few of them 
were thought to be authoritative enough for writers to write commentaries 
thereon. If one is to judge of the importance of a Smriti by the test as 
to whether or not it has become the subject matter of a commentary, 
then the Smritis which can be called standard and authoritative will be 
the Manu Smriti, Yajnavalkya Smriti and the Narada Smriti. Of these 
Smritis the Manu Smriti stands supreme. It is pre-eminently the source 
of all Dharma. 

To understand what is the Dharma for which the Hindu is ready to 
wage war on the untouchables, one must know the rules contained in 
the Smritis, particularly those contained in the Manu Smriti. Without 
some knowledge of these rules, it would not be possible to understand 
the reaction of the Hindus to the revolt of the untouchables. For our 
purpose it is not necessary to cover the whole field of Dharma in all its 
branches as laid down in the Smritis. It is enough to know that branch 
of the Dharma which in modern parlance is called the law of persons, 
or to put it in non-technical language, that part of the Dharma which 
deals with right, duty or capacity as based on status. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


275 


THEIR WISHER ARE LAWS UNTO US 275 

I therefore propose to reproduce below such texts from Manu Smriti 
as are necessary to give a complete idea of the social organization 
recognized by Manu and the rights and duties prescribed by him for 
the different classes comprised in his social system. 

The social system as laid down by Manu has not been properly 
understood and it is therefore necessary to utter a word of caution 
against a possible misunderstanding. It is commonly said and as 
commonly believed that what Manu does is to prescribe a social system 
which goes by the name of Chaturvarna — a technical name for a social 
system in which all persons are divided into four distinct classes. Many 
are under the impression that this is all that the Dharma as laid down 
by Manu prescribes. This is a grievous error and if not corrected is 
sure to lead to a serious misunderstanding of what Manu has in fact 
prescribed and what is the social system he conceived to be the ideal 
system. 

I think this is an entire misreading of Manu. It will be admitted that 
the divisions of society into four classes comprized within Chaturvarna 
is not primary with Manu. In a sense this division is secondary to 
Manu. To him it is merely an arrangement inter se between those 
who are included in the Chaturvarna. To many, the chief thing is not 
whether a man is a Brahman, Kshatriya, Vaishya or Shudra. That 
is a division which has existed before him. Manu added, accentuated 
and stratified that difference. The division did not originate with him. 
But what did originate with Manu is a new division between (1) those 
who are within the pale of Chaturvarna and (2) those who are outside 
the pale of Chaturvarna. This new social division is original to Manu. 
This is his addition to the ancient Dharma of the Hindus. This division 
is fundamental to Manu because he was the first to introduce it and 
recognize it by the stamp of his authority. 

The texts which have a bearing on the subject must therefore be 
arranged under two heads (1) texts relating to those who are within 
the Chaturvarna and (2) texts relating to those who are outside the 
Chaturvarna. 

1. Those within the Pale of the Chaturvarna. Their origin and their 
duties 

(1) This (Universe) existed in the shape of Darkness, unperceived, 
destitute of distinctive marks, untenable by reasoning, 
unknowable, wholly immersed, as it were in a deep sleep. 


(1) Manu I. 5. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


276 


276 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(2) Then the divine self existent (Svayambhu, himself) indiscernible 
(but) making (all) this, the great elements and the rest discernible, 
appeared with irresistible (creative) power, dispelling the darkness. 

(3) But for the sake of the prosperity of the worlds, he caused the 
Brahmana, the Kshatriya, the Vaishya, and the Shudra to proceed 
from his mouth, his arms, his thighs and his feet. 

(4) But in order to protect this Universe. He, the most resplendant 
one, assigned separate (duties and) occupations to those who sprang 
from his mouth, arms, thighs and feet. 

(5) To the Brahmans he assigned teaching and studying (the Vedas), 
sacrificing (performing sacrificial ceremonies) for their own benefit 
and for others, giving and accepting (of alms). 

(6) The Kshatriya he commanded to protect the people, to bestow 
gifts, to offer sacrifices, to study (the Veda), and to abstain from 
attaching himself to sensual pleasures. 

(7) The Vaishya to tend cattle, to bestow gifts, to offer sacrifices, to 
study (the Veda), to trade, to lend money and to cultivate the land. 

(8) One occupation only the lord prescribed to the Shudra, to serve 
meekly even these (other) three castes. 

(9) A student, an apprentice, a hired servant, and fourthly an official; 
these must be regarded as labourers. Slaves are those who are 
born in the house and the rest. 

(10) The sages have distinguished five sorts of attendants according to 
law. Among these are four sorts of labourers (mentioned above). 
The slaves (are the fifth category, of which they are) fifteen species. 

(11) One born at (his master’s) house; one purchased; one received by 
gift; one obtained by inheritance; one maintained during a general 
famine; one pledged by his rightful owner. 

(12) One released from a heavy debt; one made captive in a fight; one 
won through a wager, one who has come forward declaring ‘I am 
thine’ an apostate from asceticism; one enslaved for a stipulated 
period. 

(13) One who has become a slave in order to get a maintenance; one 
enslaved on account of his connection with a female slave; and one 
self sold. These are fifteen classes of slaves as declared in law. 

(14) Among these the four named first cannot be released from bondage, 
except by the favour of their owners. Their bondage is hereditary. 

(15) The sages have declared that the state of dependence is 
common to all these; but that their respective position and 
income depends on their particular caste and occupation. 

(2) Manu I. 6; (3) Ibid,., 1. 31; (4) Ibid., I. 87; (5) Ibid., I. 88; (6) Ibid., I. 89; (7) Ibid., 
I. 90; (8) Ibid., 1. 91; (9) Narad V. 3; (10) Ibid.. V. 2; (11) Ibid., V. 26; (12) Ibid., V. 27; 
(13) Ibid., V. 28; (14) Ibid., V. 29; (15) Ibid, V. 4. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


277 


THEIR WISHER ARE LAWS UNTO US 277 

2. Those outside the Pale of Chaturvarna. Their origin and their duties. 

This is what Manu has to say about their origin and their position. 

(1) All those tribes in this world, which are excluded from (the 
community of) those born from the mouth, the arms, the thighs, 
and the feet (of Brahman), are called Dasyus, whether they speak 
the language of the Mlekkhas (barbarians) or that of the Aryans. 

(2) Near well-known trees and burial ground, on mountains and in 
groves, let these (tribes) dwell, known (by certain marks), and 
subsisting by their peculiar occupations. 

(3) But the dwellings of the Chandalas and Shwapakas shall be 
outside the village, they must be made apapatras and their wealth 
(shall be) dogs and donkeys. 

(4) Their dress (shall be) the garments of the dead, (they shall eat) 
their food from broken dishes, black iron (shall be) there ornaments, 
they must always wander from place to place. 

(5) A man who fulfils a religious duty, shall not seek intercourse 
with them; their transactions (shall be) among themselves and 
their marriages with their equals. 

(6) Their food shall be given to them by others (than an Aryan giver) 
in a broken dish; at night they shall not walk about in villages 
and in towns. 

(7) By day they must go about for the purpose of their work, 
distinguished by marks at the King’s command, and they shall 
carry out the corpses (of persons) who have no relatives, that is 
a settled rule. 

(8) By the King’s order they shall always execute the Criminals in 
accordance with the law, and they shall take for themselves the 
clothes, the beds and the ornaments of (such) criminals. 

(9) He who has had connection with a woman of one of the lowest 
castes shall be put to death. 

(10) If one who (being a member of the Chandalas or some other low 
caste) must not be touched, intentionally defiles by his touch one 
who (as a member of a twice born caste) may be touched (by 
other twice born persons only) he shall be put to death. 

I have already said, that to Manu, this division between those 
who are within the pale of Chaturvarna and those who are outside 
of it was a division which was real. It was so real that Manu calls 
those who were outside the pale of Chaturvarna by the name Bahayas 
which means excluded i.e. excluded from or outside of the system 
of Chaturvarna. It was a division to which he attached far reaching 

(1) Manu X. 45, (2) Ibid.. X. 50; (3) Ibid.. X. 51; (4) Ibid.. X. 52; (5) Ibid.. X. 53; (6) 
Ibid.. X. 54; (7) Ibid.. X. 55; (8) Ibid.. X. 56; (9) Vishnu V. 43; (10) Ibid.. V. 104. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


278 


278 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

consequences. This division was intended to result in a difference of 
status and citizenship. It is true that all those who are within the pale 
of Chaturvarna are not all on the same level. Within the Chaturvarna 
there are the Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas, Shudras and Slaves all 
unequal in status. Still they are within the Chaturvarna. Those within 
the Chaturvarna have a status in the eye of the law of Manu and a 
respect in the eye of the public. Those outside it have no respect in 
the eye of that society. The difference is also one of citizenship. Those 
within the Chaturvarna have rights to enjoy and remedies to enforce 
them. Those outside the Chaturvarna have no rights and no remedies. 

This difference between those who are within the Chaturvarna 
and those outside of it have a kind of resemblance to the difference 
between civics i.e. citizens and preregenis or hostis i.e. non-citizens in 
the early Roman Law. The early law of Rome was essentially personal — 
not territorial. A man enjoyed the benefit of its institutions and of its 
protection, not because he happened to be within Roman territory, but 
because he was a citizen — one of those by whom and for whom its law 
was established. The story of the early jus getium was that a man 
sojourning within the bounds of a foreign state was at the mercy of the 
latter and its citizens; that he himself might be dealt with as a slave, all 
that belonged to him appropriated by the first comer. For he was outside 
the pale of the law. Under the jus civile the private rights which were 
peculiar to a Roman citizen were summed up in three abstract terms, 
Conubium, Commercium and Actio. Conubium was the capacity to enter 
into a marriage which would be productive of the palua potestas and 
agnation which in their turn were the foundation of intestate succession, 
guardianship etc. Commercium was the capacity for acquiring or alienating 
property. Actio was the capacity to bring a suit in a Court of law for 
the vindication, protection, or enforcement of a right either included 
in or flowing from connubium or commercium, or directly conferred by 
statute. These three capacities were enjoyed only by the Roman Citizens. 
A non-citizen was entitled to none of these rights. 

Ill 

The division between classes who are within the Chaturvarna and 
those who are without it though real and fundamental is undoubtedly 
archaic in its terminology. The system of Chaturvarna is no longer 
operative as law. It is therefore somewhat academic to speak of classes 
being within Chaturvarna and without Chaturvarna. The question will 
be asked, what are the modern counterparts of these ancient classes ? 
The question is perfectly legitimate especially as I have to explain how 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


279 


THEIR WISHER ARE LAWS UNTO US 279 

the ancient law of Manu is responsible for the present day lawlessness 
of the Hindus. Although I am using archaic language, two things will 
show that my thesis is true. The first is that the ancient social divisions 
of Manu are not without their counterpart in modern times. The modern 
counterparts of those ancient divisions are Hindus and untouchables. 
Those whom Manu included within the Chaturvarna correspond to the 
modern composite class called Hindus. Those whom Manu called Bahayas 
(outside the Chaturvarna) correspond to the present day untouchables of 
India. The dividing line between the four classes — Brahman, Kshatriya, 
Vaishya and Shudra — included within Chaturvarna have in modern 
times become some what blurred and there has been some degree of 
amalgamation between them. But the line which Manu drew between 
those within the Chaturvarna from those outside the Chaturvarna is 
still clear and is not allowed to be effaced or crossed. That line is the 
line which at present separates the Hindus from the untouchables. The 
first thing that is clear is that the ancient divisions have descended to 
modern times. The only change is the change of names. 

The second question is, has the law as laid down by Manu for the 
Bahayas any counterpart in the present day social relationship between 
the Hindus and the Untouchables ? To those who doubt I ask to take 
the following case into consideration. The incident has occurred in the 
Ramnad District of the Madras Presidency. 

In December 1930 the Kallar in Ramanad propounded eight 
prohibitions, the disregard of which led to the use of violence by the 
Kallar against the untouchables whose huts were fired, whose granaries 
and property were destroyed, and whose livestock was looted. These eight 
prohibitions were as follows : — 

“(i) that the Adi-Dravidas shall not wear ornament of gold and silver; 

(ii) that the males should not be allowed to wear their clothes below their 
knees or above the hips; 

(iii) that their males should not wear coats or shirts or baniyans; 

(iv) No Adi-Dravida should be allowed to have his hair cropped. 

(v) that the Adi-Dravidas should not use other than earthenware vessels 
in their homes; 

(vi) their women shall not be allowed to cover the upper portion of their 
bodies by clothes or ravukais or thavanies; 

(vii) their women shall not be allowed to use flowers or saffron paste; and 

(viii) the men shall not use umbrellas for protection against sun and rain 
nor should they wear sandals”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


280 


280 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

In June 1931, the eight prohibitions not having been satisfactorily 
observed by the exterior castes in question, the Kallar met together and 
framed eleven prohibitions, which went still further than the original 
eight, and an attempt to enforce these led to more violence. These eleven 
prohibitions were : — 

“1. The Adi-Dravidas and Devendrakula Vellalars should not wear clothes 
below their knees. 

2. The men and women of the above-said depressed classes should not 
wear gold jewels. 

3. The women should carry water only in mud pots and not in copper or 
brass vessels. They should use straw only to carry the water pots and 
no clothes should be used for that purpose. 

4. Their children should not read and get themselves literate or educated. 

5. The children should be asked only to tend the cattle of the Mirasdars. 

6. Their men and women should work as slaves of the Mirasdars, in their 
respective Pannais. 

7. They should not cultivate the land either on waram or lease from the 
Mirasdars. 

8. They must sell away their own lands to Mirasdars of the village at 
very cheap rates, and if they don’t do so, no water will be allowed to 
them to irrigate their lands. Even if something is grown by the help 
of rain water, the crops should be robbed away, when they are ripe 
for harvest. 

9. They must work as coolies from 7 a.m. to 6 p.m. under the Mirasdars 
and their wages shall be for men Rs. 0-4-0 per day and for women 
Rs. 0-2-0 per day. 

10. The abovesaid communities should not use Indian Music (melam etc.,) 
in their marriages and other celebrations. 

11. They must stop their habit of going on a horse in procession before 
tying the Thali thread in marriage and they must use their house doors 
as palanquins for the marriage processions, and no vehicle should be 
used by them for any purpose”. 

Compare these prohibitions laid down by the Hindus of Ramnad 
with the prohibitions contained in the texts of Manu quoted earlier in 
this chapter against the untouchables. 

Is there any difference between the law laid down by Manu for 
the Bahayas and the conditions imposed upon the untouchables by the 
Kallars in 1931 ? After this evidence, who can doubt that the Hindu in 
doing what appears to be an Adharma to a non-Hindu is merely asking 
the untouchables to follow the Dharma as prescribed by Manu. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


281 


THEIR WISHER ARE LAWS UNTO US 281 

Take another case. Those of the Balais of the Central India. The 
Balais are an untouchable community. About the year 1927, the Balais 
started a compaign of social improvement of their community and had 
made rules prescribing that the members of their community should 
not do certain kinds of work which is degrading and should dress in a 
certain manner. These rules did not in any way affect the interests of 
the Caste Hindus. But the Caste Hindus took offence at this effort of 
the Balais to raise themselves above the status prescribed by custom 
and they decided to deal a deadly blow to what they regarded as the 
insolence of the Balais. The following is the report which appeared in 
the papers of how the Caste Hindus dealt with the rebelious Balais. 1 

Tyranny of Hindus 
Rules for Balais 
Mode of Life Laid Down 

“Last May (1927) High Caste Hindus, viz, Kalotas, Rajputs and 
Brahmins, including the patels and putwaris of villages Kanaria, Bicholee 
Hafsi, Mardana and of about 15 other villages in the Indore District, 
informed the Balais of their respective villages that if they wished to 
live among them, they must conform to the following rules : — 

(1) Balais must not wear gold lace bordered pugrees; (2) they 
must not wear dhoties with coloured or fancy borders; (3) they must 
convey intimation of the death of any Hindu to relatives of the 
deceased — no matter how far away these relatives might be living; 

(4) in all Hindu marriages, the Balais must play music before the 
processions, and during the marriage; (5) the Balai women must not 
wear gold or silver ornaments; they must not wear fancy gowns, or 
jackets; (6) Balai women must attend all cases of confinement of 
Hindu women; (7) the Balais must render services without demanding 
remuneration, and must accept whatever a Hindu is pleased to give; 

(8) if the Balais do not agree to abide by these terms, they must 
clear out of the villages. 

BALAIS REFUSE COMPLIANCE 

“The Balais refused to comply; and the Hindu element proceeded 
against them. Balais were not allowed to get water from the village 
wells, they were not allowed to let their cattle graze. Balais were 
prohibited from passing through land owned by a Hindu; so that if the 


The report is taken from the Times of India of 10-2-38 & 1-4-38. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


282 


282 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

field of a Balai was surrounded by fields owned by Hindus, the Balai 
could have no access to his own field. The Hindus also led their cattle 
to graze down the fields of Balais. The Balais submitted petitions to the 
Darbar against these persecutions; but as they could get no timely relief, 
and the operation continued, hundreds of Balais, with their wives and 
children, were obliged to abandon their homes in which their ancestors 
lived for generations and migrate to adjoining States, viz., to villages in 
Dhar, Dewas, Bhopal, Gwalior and other States. 

COMPULSORY AGREEMENT 

“Only a few days ago the Hindus of Reoti village, barely seven 
miles to north of Indore City, ordered the Balais to sign a stamped 
agreement in accordance with the rules framed against the Balais 
by the Hindus of other villages. The Balais refused to comply. It is 
alleged that some of them were beaten by the Hindus; and one Balai 
was fastened to a post, and was told that he would be let go on 
agreeing to sign the agreement. He signed the agreement and was 
released. Some Balais from this village ran up to the Prime Minister 
the next day, i.e. on the 20th December, and made a complaint about 
the ill treatment they received from the Hindu villagers of Reoti. 
They were sent to the Subha of the district. This officer, with the 
help of the police, made inquiries at the village, and recommended 
that action be taken against the Hindus under section 342 and 147 
and against the Balais under section 147, Indian Penal Code. 

Balais leave villages 
Caste Tyranny 
Ignorance of law a handicap 

“There has been no improvement in the treatment of the Balais 
by the Hindu residents of certain villages. Balais, it has already been 
reported, have been ill treated by the higher caste Hindus. From the 
Dopalpur Pargana alone, Indore District, a large number of Balais 
have had to leave their homes and find shelter in adjoining States. 

The villages from which Balais have been forced to clear out are 
Badoli, Ahirkharal, Piploda, Morkhers, Pamalpur, Karoda, Chatwada, 
Newri, Pan, Sanauda, Ajnoti, Khatedi and Sanavada. Pamalpur 
village has been altogether deserted and not a Balai man, woman 
or child is to be found there. Nanda Balai a resident of one of the 
above villages, it is alleged, was severely beaten by the Hindus of the 
village. In one village, the report goes, the Hindus burnt down all the 
dwellings of the Balais but the offenders have not yet been traced. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


283 


THEIR WISHER ARE LAWS UNTO US 283 

“Balais are ignorant village folk, who are ignorant of legal 
procedure and think that if a petition is sent to the Sirkar all that 
is required will be done for them. They have not the knowledge; or 
the means and practices, to pursue a complaint to its end; and, as 
they, it is said in some cases, failed to attend or produce witnesses 
in support of their allegations, the magistrate had no alternative 
but to dismiss their complaint.” 

Looked at from the point of view of Dharma and Adharma, can it be 
doubted that underneath the lawlessness and ruthlessness of the Hindus 
in suppressing the revolt of the untouchables, they are actuated by what 
they think a noble purpose of preventing an outrage upon their Dharma ? 

IV 

It may well be asked how much of this Dharma of Manu now remains ? 
It must be admitted that as law in the sense of rules which a Court 
of Judicature is bound to observe in deciding disputes, the Dharma of 
Manu has ceased to have any operative force-except in matters such as 
marriage succession etc. — matters which affect only the individual. As 
Law governing social conduct and civic rights it is inoperative. But if it 
has gone out as law, it remains as custom. 

Custom is no small a thing as compared to Law. It is true that law is 
enforced by the state through its police power; custom, unless it is valid 
it is not. But in practice this difference is of no consequence. Custom is 
enforced by people far more effectively than law is by the state. This is 
because the compelling force of an organized people is far greater than 
the compelling force of the state. 

Not only has there been no detriment to its enforceability on account 
of its having ceased to be law in the technical sense but there are 
circumstances which are sufficient to prevent any loss of efficacy to this 
Dharma of Manu. 

Of these circumstances the first is the force of custom. There 
exists in every social group certain (habits*) not only to acting, but 
of feeling and believing, of valuing, of approving and disapproving 
which embody the mental habitudes of the group. Every new comer 
whether he comes in the group by birth or adoption is introduced 
into this social medium. In every group there goes on the process of 
persistently forcing these mental habitudes of the group upon the 
attention of each new member of the group. Thereby the group carries 
on the socialization of the individual of the shaping of the mental 
and practical habits of the new comer. Being dependent upon the 


Inserted by Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


284 


284 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

group he can no more repudiate the mental habitudes of the group than 
he can the condition and regulation of his physical environment. Indeed, 
so dependent the individual is on the group that he readily falls in 
line and allows the current ways of esteeming and behaving prevailing 
in the community, to become a standing habit of his own mind. This 
socializing process of the individual by the group has been graphically 
described by Grote. He says — 

“This aggregate of beliefs and predispositions to believe, ethical, 
Religious, Aesthetical, and Social respecting what is true, or false, 
probable or improbable, just or unjust, holy or unholy, honourable 
or base, respectable or contemptible, pure or impure, beautiful or 
ugly, decent or indecent, obligatory to do, or obligatory to avoid, 
respecting the status and relations of each individual in the 
society, respecting even the admissible fashions of amusement and 
recreation — this is an established fact and condition of things, the 
real origin of which for the most part unknown, but which each new 

member of the group is born to and finds subsisting It becomes 

a part of each person’s nature, a standing habit of mind, or fixed 
set of mental tendencies, according to which particular experience is 

interpreted and particular persons appreciated The community 

hate, despise or deride any individual member who proclaims his 

dissent from their social creed Their hatred manifests itself in 

different ways At the very best by exclusion from that amount 

of forbearance, good will and estimation without which the life of 
an individual becomes insupportable .” 1 

But what is it that helps to bring about this result ? Grote has himself 
answered this question. His answer is that, this is due to — “Nomos (Law 
and Custom), King of all” (which Herodotus cites from Pindar) exercises 
plenary power, spiritual and temporal, over individual minds, moulding 
the emotions as well as the intellect, according to the local type.... and 
reigning under the appearance of habitual, self suggested tendencies. 

What all this comes to is that, when in any community, the ways of 
acting, feeling, believing, or valuing or of approving and disapproving 
have become cystalized into customs and traditions, they do not need 
any sanction of law for their enforcement. The amplitude of plenary 
powers which the group can always generate by mass action is always 
ready to see that they are not broken. 

The same thing applies to the Dharma laid down by Manu. This 
Dharma of Manu, by reason of the governing force which it has had 
for centuries, has become an integral and vital part of the customs and 

1 Grote : Plato and the other Companions of Socrates, Vol. I, p. 249. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


285 


THEIR WISHER ARE LAWS UNTO US 285 

traditions of the Hindus. It has become ingrained and has given colour 
to their life blood. As law it controlled the actions of the Hindus. Though 
now a custom, it does not do less. It moulds the character and determines 
the outlook of generation after generation. 

The second thing which prevents the Dharma of Manu from fading 
away is that the law does not prevent its propagation. This is a 
circumstance which does not seem to be present to the minds of many 
people. It is said that one of the blessings of the British Rule is that 
Manu Smriti has ceased to be the law of the land. That the Courts are 
not required to enforce the provisions contained in Manu Smriti as rules 
of law is undoubtedly a great blessing — which might not be sufficiently 
appreciated except by those who were crushed beneath the weight of 
this “infamous” thing. It is as great a blessing to the untouchables as 
the Reformation was to the peoples of Europe. At the same time it must 
be remembered that the Reformation would not have been a permanent 
gain if it had been followed by what is called the Protestant Revolution. 
The essential features of the Protestant Revolution as I understand 
them are: (1) That the state is supreme and the Church is subordinate 
to the state. (2) The doctrine to be preached must be approved by the 
state. (3) The clergy shall be servants of the state and shall be liable 
to punishment not only for offences against the general law of the land 
but also liable for offences involving moral turpitude and for preaching 
doctrines not approved of by the state. I am personally a believer in the 
“Established Church”. It is a system which gives safety and security 
against wrong and pernicious doctrines preached by any body and every 
body as doctrines of religion. I know there are people who are opposed 
to the system of an “Established Church”. But whether the system of an 
“Established Church” is good or bad, the fact remains that there is no 
legal prohibition against the propagation of the Dharma laid down by 
Manu. The courts do not recognize it as law. But the law does not treat 
it as contrary to law. Indeed every village every day. When Pandits are 
preaching it to parents and parents preach it to their children, how can 
Manu Smriti fade away ? Its lessons are reinforced every day and no 
body is allowed to forget that untouchability is a part of their Dharma. 

This daily propagation of the Dharma of Manu has infected the 
minds of all men and women young and old. Nay, it has even infected 
the minds of the judges. There is a case reported 1 from Calcutta. A 
certain Dome (untouchable) by name Nobin Dome was prosecuted for 
theft of a goat. He was found to be not guilty. He filed a complaint 
for defamation against the complaint. The magistrate dismissed the 


2 W.R. (Cr.) 35. Queen v/s Nobin Dome. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


286 


286 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

complaint on the ground that as he was low caste man he had no 
reputation. The High Court had to intervene and direct the Magistrate 
that he was wrong in his view and that under the Penal Code all persons 
were equal. But the question remains, how did the Magistrate get the 
idea that an untouchable had no reputation ? Surely from the teaching 
of the Manu Smriti. 

The Dharma of Manu had never been a mere past. It is as present 
as though it were enacted today. It bids fair to continue to have its 
sway in the future. The only question is whether its sway will be for a 
time or for ever. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


287 


Chapter 24 

UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF 
MR. GANDHI 

(I) His work through the Congress 

I. A Strange Welcome. II. The Great Repudiation. III. A Charge 
Sheet. IV. The Basis of the Charge Sheet. V. The Tragedy of 
Gandhi. VI. His Legacy to India and the Untouchables. 

On the 28th December 1931, Mr. Gandhi returned to India from 
London where he had gone as a delegate to attend the second Session 
of the Indian Round Table Conference. At the Round Table Conference, 
Mr. Gandhi had been an utter, ignominous failure both as a personality 
and as a politician. I know that my opinion will not be accepted by the 
Hindus. But the unfortunate part is that my opinion in this respect 
coincides with the opinion of Mr. Gandhi’s best friend. I will cite the 
opinions of two. This is what Mr. Ewer, who was closely associated with 
Mr. Gandhi during the Round Table Conference, wrote about the role 
Mr. Gandhi played at the Round Table Conference in London. 

“Gandhi in the St. James’ Palace has not fulfilled the unwise 
expectation of those who saw him bestriding the Conference like a 
colossus 

He was out of his elements.” 

k k k 

“His first speech, with its sentimental appeal, its over-stressing 
of humility, its reiteration of single-minded concern for the dumb 
suffering millions, was a failure. No one questioned its sincerity. 

But somehow it rang false. It was the right thing, perhaps, but 
it was in the wrong place. Nor were his later interventions on 
the whole more successful. A rather querulous complaint that 
the British Government had not produced a plan for the new 
Indian Constitution shocked some of Gandhi’s colleagues, who 
had hardly expected to see the representative of the National 
Congress appealing to British Ministers for guidance and initiative. 

The protest against the pegging of the rupee to the pound was 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


288 


288 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

astonishingly ineffective. The contributions to the discussions on 
franchise and kindred matters were of little importance. Behind 
the scenes he was active enough in the Hindu-Moslem negotiations, 
but here, too, results were intangible. Not for a moment did Gandhi 
take the lead or materially influence the course of committee work. 

He sat there, sometimes speaking, sometimes silent, while the work 
went on, much as it would have gone on without him .” 1 

This is what Bolton has to say about Mr. Gandhi’s achievement at 
the Round Table Conference. 

How did Mr. Gandhi fare as a statesman and a politician? 

At the close of the first session of the Round Table Conference 
there were three questions which had not been settled. The question of 
minorities, the question of the Federal structure and the question of the 
status of India in the Empire, were the three outstanding problems which 
were the subject matter of controversy. Their solution demanded great 
statesmanship. Many said that these questions were not settled because 
the wisdom and authority of the Congress was not represented at the 
Round Table Conference. At the second session, Mr. Gandhi came and 
made good the deficiency. Did Mr. Gandhi settle any of these unsettled 
problems? I think it is not unfair to say that Mr. Gandhi created fresh 
disunity in the Conference. He began the childish game of ridiculing 
every Indian delegate. He questioned their honesty, he questioned their 
representative character. He taunted the liberals as arm-chair politicians 
and as leaders without any followers. To the Muslims he said that he 
represented the Muslim masses better than they did. He claimed that 
the Depressed Class delegates did not represent the Depressed Classes 
and that he did. This was the refrain which he repeated ad nauseum 
at the end of every speech. The non-Congress delegates deserve the 
thanks of all honest people for their having tolerated this nonsense 
and arrogance of Mr. Gandhi and collaborated with him to save him 
and to save the country from his mistake. Apart from this discourtesy 
to fellow-delegates, did Mr. Gandhi stand up for the cause he came to 
champion? He did not. His conduct of affairs was ignominious. Instead 
of standing up and fighting he began to yield on issues on which he 
ought never to have ceased fire. He yielded to the Princes and agreed 
that their representatives in the Federal legislature should be nominated 
by them and not elected, as demanded by their subjects. He yielded to 
the conservatives and consented to be content with provincial autonomy 
and not to insist upon central responsibility for which many lakhs of 
Indians went to gaol. The only people to whom he would not yield 

1 “Gandhi in London” — Asia, February 1932 . 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


289 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 289 

were the minorities — the only party to whom he could have yielded 
with honour to himself and advantage to the country. 

Nothing has helped so much to shatter the prestige of Mr. Gandhi 
as going to the Round Table Conference. The spectacle of Mr. Gandhi 
at the Round Table Conference must have been painful to many of 
his friends. He was not fitted to play the role he undertook to play. 
No country has ever sent a delegate to take part in the framing of 
the constitution who was so completely unequipped in training and in 
study. Gandhi went to the Round Table Conference with a song of the 
saint Narsi Mehta on his tongue. It would have been better for him 
and better for his country if he had taken in his arm pit a volume 
on comparative constitutional law. Devoid of any knowledge of the 
subject he was called upon to deal with, he was quite powerless to 
destroy the proposals put forth by the British or to meet them with 
his alternatives. No wonder Mr. Gandhi, taken out of the circle of his 
devotees and placed among politicians, was at sea. At every turn he 
bungled and finding that he could not even muddle through, he gave 
up the game and returned to India. 

How was Mr. Gandhi received when he landed on the Indian 
soil? It may sound strange to outsiders and to those who are not the 
devotees of Mr. Gandhi but it is a fact that when the S. S. Pilsner of 
the Lloyd Triestino entered the harbour of Bombay at 8 a.m. in the 
morning of the 28th December 1931 there came to receive him an 
enthusiastic crowd of men, women and children who had assembled 
at the Pier in tens of thousands to greet him, to welcome him back 
and to have his Durshan. The following extracts from the Times of 
India and the Evening News of Bombay will serve to give a vivid idea 
of the grandeur of this reception. 

“The Pilsner was escorted into the harbour by Desh Sevikas 
(women volunteers of the Congress) in saffron coloured sarees who 
went out in launches some distance from the pier. 

“The Congress Committee had asked the Bombay Flying Club 
to fly an Aeroplane or two over the Pilsner and drop garlands as 
she came along side the pier, but the Flying Club, sanely preferring 
to keep out of politics, refused to grant the Congress demand. 

“The spacious Central Hall at Ballard Pier was decorated 
with festoons and Congress flags and a large dais was put up at 
the centre with chairs placed on all sides for representatives of 
various organizations, local and upcountry, who were given passes 
for admission. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


290 


290 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“Both the approaches to the reception hall from the wharf and 
from the city were lined by Desh Sevikas waving national flags and 
the duty of guarding the dais and of regulating and directing the 
assembly inside the hall was also entrusted to the women volunteers. 

“Mr. Gandhi reached the dais escorted by the Congress leaders 
and received an ovation. Hardly had he stepped on the dais when 
he began to be flooded with telegraph messages (presumably of 
welcome) which arrived one after another. 

“Standing on the dais he was garlanded in turn by representatives 
of the public bodies who had assembled and whose names were 
called out from a long printed list of which copies were previously 
distributed. 

“The proceedings inside the reception hall terminated with the 
garlanding. 

“A procession was then formed in four, in place of the carriage 
which was intended to be the conveyance for Mr. Gandhi. He was 
seated in a gaily decorated motor car, with Mr. Vallabhbhai Patel 
to his left and Mr. Vitthalbhai Patel to his right and Mr. K. F. 
Nariman, President of the Bombay Provincial Congress Committee, 
on the front seat. 

“Preceded by a pilot car and followed by others containing 
the Congress Working Committee members, the procession passed 
through the Ballard Pier Road, Hornby Road and Kalbadevi which 
had been decorated by the citizens at the instance of the Congress 
Committee and lined on either side by cheering crowds, five to ten 
deep till the party reached “Mani Bhuvan, Gamdevi”. 

At no stage of this welcome did Mr. Gandhi open his lips to 
acknowledge it. This man of vows was under his Sunday vow of silence 
which had not run out till then and nor did he think that etiquette, 
good manners or respect for those who had assembled required that he 
should terminate his vow earlier. 

The official historian of the Congress describes 1 this reception given 
to Mr. Gandhi in the following terms: 

“There were gathered in Bombay representatives of all parts and 
Provinces in India to accord a fitting welcome to the Tribune of the 
people. Gandhi greeted the friends that went on board the steamer 
to welcome him, patting many, thumping a few and pulling the 
venerable Abbas Tyabji by his beard. There was a formal welcome 
in one of the Halls of Customs House and then a procession in the 
streets of Bombay which kings might envy in their own country”. 

1 Pattabhi Sitaramayya — History of the Congress, p. 857. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


291 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 291 

On reading this account one is reminded of the Irish Sein Fein 
Delegates who in 1921, just 10 years before, had gone to London at 
the invitation of Mr. Lloyd George for the settlement of the Irish Home 
Rule question. As is well known the Irish Delegates secured from the 
British Cabinet a treaty which was signed on the 8th December 1921. 
The Treaty was subsequently submitted for approval to the Dail, the 
Parliament of the Sein Fein Party which met from 14th December 1921 
to 7th January 1922. On the 7th January a division was taken. There 
were 64 votes for ratifying the treaty and 57 against. And what was the 
reception given to the Irish delegates who secured this treaty? Arthur 
Griffith — who was the head of the Irish Delegation and Michael Collins 
who was his most prominent colleague, were both of them shot by the 
anti-treaty Sein Feiners, the former on the 12th and the latter on the 
22nd August 1922. The reason for sending them to such cruel death 
was that the treaty which they signed did not secure the inclusion of 
Ulster and a republic for Ireland. It is true the treaty did not grant this. 
But if it is remembered that negotiations were opened on the express 
understanding on the part of both sides that these two questions were 
outside the scope of negotiations it will be granted that if the treaty 
did not include these it was no fault of the Irish Delegates. The fury 
and ferocity of the anti treaty Sein Feiners against the Irish Delegates 
had no moral foundation and the fate that befell Arthur Griffith and 
Michael Collins can by no stretch of imagination be said to be one which 
they deserved. 

Be that as it may, this welcome to Mr. Gandhi will be regarded as 
a very strange event. Both went to win Swaraj, Griffith and Collins 
for Ireland, Gandhi for India, Griffith and Collins succeeded, almost 
triumphed; Gandhi failed and returned with nothing but defeat and 
humiliation. Yet Collins and Griffith were shot and Gandhi was given a 
reception which kings could have envied !! What a glaring and a cruel 
contrast between the fate that awaited Collins and Griffith and the 
reception arranged for Gandhi? Are the Indian Patriots different from 
the Irish Patriots? Did the masses render this welcome out of blind 
devotion or were they kept in darkness of the failure of Mr. Gandhi by 
a mercenary Press? This is more than I can answer. 1 

II 

While this great welcome was being accorded to Mr. Gandhi 
the Untouchables of Bombay had come to the Pier to repudiate 

1 The official historian of the Congress perhaps realizing that this welcome to 
Mr. Gandhi on the ground of his political achievement says — (Sitaramayya’s statement 
not given in the Ms. — Ed.). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


292 


292 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Gandhi. Referring to this demonstration, the newspaper reports said: 

“Just outside the gate of Ballard Pier, the scene was most exciting. 

On one side were drawn up Depressed Class volunteers in uniform, 
weaving black flags to the accompaniment of derisive shouts against 
Mr. Gandhi and laudatory cries in praise of their leader, while on 
the other side Congress followers kept up a din of counter shouts.” 

This Untouchable demonstration included men and women. The 
demonstrators numbered thousands, all waving Black Flags as a mark of 
repudiation of Mr. Gandhi. They were a determined crowd and, despite 
intimidation by the superior forces of the Congress assembled there 
to welcome Mr. Gandhi, were bent on showing that they repudiated 
Mr. Gandhi. This led to a clash and blood was split. There were forty 
casualties on each side. 

For the first time Mr. Gandhi was made aware that there could 
be black flags even against him. This must have come to him as a 
shock. When he was asked about it later in the day, he said he was 
not angry, the Untouchables being the flesh of his flesh and bone of 
his bone. This is of course the Mahatmaic way of concealing the truth. 
One would not mind this convenient and conventional lie if there were 
behind it a realization that the crowd could not always be trusted to 
be loyal to its hero. Congressmen in India sadly lack the realism of a 
man like Cromwell. It is related that when Cromwell returned after 
a great battle, an enormous crowd came out to greet him. A friend 
sought to impress upon him the immensity of the crowd. But Cromwell 
dismissed the subject with the leconic remark,: “Oh yes, I know many 
more will come to see me hanged.”!! No Congress leader feels the realism 
of Cromwell. Either he believes that the day will never come when he 
will be hanged or he believes that the Indian crowd will never become 
a thinking crowd. That part of the Indian crowd does think was shown 
by the representatives of the Untouchables who assembled on the 28th 
to greet Mr. Gandhi with black flags. 

Why did the Untouchables repudiate Mr. Gandhi ? The answer to 
this question will be found in a statement issued by the organizers of 
these demonstrations which was printed and circulated on that day. The 
following are extracts from it. 

“Our Charge sheet against Gandhiji and Congress” 

“Enough of patronising attitude and lip sympathy. We ask 
for justice and fair play.” 

1. In spite of the fact that the removal of untouchability has 

been included in the constructive programme of the Congress, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


293 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 293 

practically nothing has so far been done by that body to achieve that 
object, and in our fights against untouchability at Mahad and Nasik 
most of the local Congress leaders have been our bitter opponents. 

2. The attitude of Gandhiji at the Round Table Conference in London 
with regard to the demands of the Depressed Classes as put forward 
by their accredited and trusted leader Dr. Ambedkar, was most 
unreasonable, obstinate and inexplicable. 

3. Gandhiji was prepared to concede on behalf of the Congress the 
special claims of the Mohamedans and the Sikhs including their 
demand for separate representation on “historic grounds”, but he 
was not willing even to concede reserved seats in general electorates 
to the Depressed Classes, although he knew, or should have known, 
what sort of treatment they would get, should they be thrown upon 
at the mercy on caste Hindus. 

k k k k k 

9. Gandhiji has said in opposing the claims of the Depressed Classes for 
separate representation that he does not want the Hindu Community to be 
subjected to vivisection or dissection. But the Congress is now dissecting 
the community of Untouchables by playing one section against another. 
Gandhiji and the Congress are not playing the fair game. Open enemies 
are far better than treacherous friends. 

10. Attempts are being made to show that Gandhiji and the Congress 
alone represent the Depressed Classes by presenting addresses through a 
handful of hirelings and dupes. Is it not our duty to demonstrate the fact 
by coming out in thousands and proclaiming the truth? This is our charge 
sheet against Gandhiji and the Congress. 

Let those who are not blind hero worshippers and blind partisans judge 
and give their verdict. 

General Secretary, 
Depressed Classes Institute. 

Ill 

Is this charge sheet true? Mr. Gandhi is known to the world not 
merely as the Political leader of India, but also as the Champion of the 
Untouchables. It is perhaps true that the outside world takes more interest 
in Mr. Gandhi because he is the champion of the Untouchables than because 
he is a political leader. For instance the Manchester Guardian very recently 
devoted an editorial to the work of Mr. Gandhi for the Untouchables. 

In the face of this, the charge appears to be quite unfounded. 
For, has not Mr. Gandhi made the Congress pledge itself to remove 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


294 


294 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

untouchability ? The Congress before it came into the hands of 
Mr. Gandhi had refused to allow any social problem to be placed before 
it for consideration. A clear cut distinction was made between political 
and social question, and scrupulous attempt was made to confine the 
deliberations and activities of the Congress to purely political questions. 
The old Congress refused to take notice of the Untouchables. It was 
with great difficulty that the Congress in 1917* for the first time 
allowed the question of the Untouchables to be placed before it and 
condescended to pass the following resolution: 

“The Congress urges upon the people of India the necessity, 
justice and righteousness of removing all disabilities imposed by 
custom upon the Depressed Classes, the disabilities being of a 
most vexatious and oppresssive character, subjecting those classes 
to considerable hardship and inconvenience.” 1 

The Congress fell onto the hands of Mr. Gandhi in 1920 and the 
Congress at its ordinary session held at Nagpur passed the following 
resolution : 


INTERCOMMUNAL UNITY 

“Finally, in order that the Khilafat and the Punjab wrongs 
may be redressed and Swarajya established within one year, this 
Congress urges upon all public bodies, whether affiliated to the 
Congress or otherwise, to devote their exclusive attention to the 
promotion of non-violence and non-cooperation with the Government 
and, inasmuch as the movement of non-cooperation can only 
succeed by complete co-operation amongst the people themselves, 
this Congress calls upon public associations to advance Hindu- 
Muslim unity and the Hindu delegates of this Congress call upon 
the leading Hindus to settle all disputes between Brahmins and 
Non-Brahmins, wherever they may be existing, and to make a 
special effort to rid Hinduism of the reproach of untouchability, 
and respectfully urges the religious heads to help the growing 
desire to reform Hinduism in the matter of its treatment of the 
suppressed classes.” 

Again did not Mr. Gandhi make the removal of untouchability 
a condition precedent for achieving Swaraj ? In the Young India of 
December 29, 1920, Mr. Gandhi wrote: 

“Non-cooperation against the Government means cooperation 
among the governed, and if Hindus do not remove the sin of 
* Year not mentioned in the Ms. — Ed. 

1 This quotation has been reproduced from page I of ‘ What Congress and Gandhi have 
done to the Untouchables’ by the author. This was not typed in the MS of this essay. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


295 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 295 

untouchability, there will be no Swaraj in one year or one hundred 
years....” 

Writing again on the conditions of Swaraj in the issue of Young India 
for February 23, 1921, he said: 

“Swaraj is easy of attainment before October next if certain 
simple conditions can be fulfilled. 1 ventured to mention one 
year in September last because 1 knew that the conditions were 
incredibly simple and 1 felt that the atmosphere in the country 
was responsive. The past five months experience has confirmed me 
in the opinion. I am convinced that the country has never been so 
ready for establishing Swaraj as now.” 

“But what is necessary for us as accurately as possible to know 
the conditions. One supreme indispensible condition is the continuance 
of non-violence.” 

“The next condition is establishing a Congress Agency in 

every village.” 

“There are certain things that are applicable to all. The potent 
thing is Swadeshi. Every home must have the spinning wheel and 
every village can organize.... and become self supporting.” 

“Every man and woman can give some money — be it even a 
pice — to the Tilak Swaraj a Fund. And we need have no anxiety 
about financing the movement ” 

“We can do nothing without Hindu-Moslem unity and without 
killing the snake of untouchability ” 

“Have we honest, earnest, industrious, patriotic workers for this 
very simple programme ? If we have, Swaraj will be established in 
India before next October.” 

What more did the Untouchables want? Here is Mr. Gandhi who had 
held himself out as the friend of the Untouchables. He prides himself 
on being their servant. He claims and fought for being accepted as 
their representative. Why should the Untouchables show such a lack of 
confidence in Mr. Gandhi ? 

On the basis of words, the charge perhaps appears unfounded. But 
does it appear equally unfounded if we have regard to deeds? Let me 
examine Mr. Gandhi’s deeds. 

The work which is claimed by Mr. Gandhi and his friends to have 
been done by him and the Congress for the Untouchables falls into two 
periods, the period which precedes the Poona Pact and the period which 
follows the Poona Pact. The first period may be called the period of the 
Bardoli Programme. The second period may be called the period of the 
Harijan Sevak Sangh. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


296 


296 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

FIRST PERIOD 

I 

To begin with the Bardoli Programme period. The Bardoli Programme 
or what is called the Constructive Programme of the Congress was 
the direct outcome of the new line of action adopted by the Congress 
in securing the political demands of the country. At the session of the 
Congress held at Nagpur in 1920 the Congress declared : 

“Whereas the people of India are now determined to establish 
Swaraj; and 

“Whereas all methods adopted by the people of India prior to 
the last special session of the Indian National Congress have failed 
to secure due recognition of their rights and liberties; 

“Now this Congress while reaffirming the resolution on non-violent 
non-cooperation passed at the Special Session of the Congress at Calcutta 
declares that the entire or any part or parts of the scheme of non-violent 
non-cooperation, with the renunciation of voluntary association with 
the present Government at one end and the refusal to pay taxes at the 
other, should be put in force at a time to be determined by either the 
Indian National Congress or the All India Congress Committee and in 
the meanwhile to prepare the Country for it”,.... 

At the session of the Congress held at Ahmedabad in 1921 it was 
declared that: 

“This Congress is further of opinion that Civil Disobedience is 
the only civilized and effective substitute for an armed rebellion.... 
and therefore advises all Congress Workers and others.... to organize 
individual civil disobedience and mass civil disobedience” 

It is to give effect to this policy of non-cooperation and civil 
disobedience and to prepare the people to take part in them that the 
Working Committee of the Congress met at Bardoli in February 1922 
and drew up the following programme of action. 

“The Working Committee advises all Congress organisations to 
be engaged in the following activities : 

(1) To enlist at least one crore of members of the Congress. 

(2) To popularise the spinning wheel and to organise the manufacture 
of hand-spun and handwoven khaddar. 

(3) To organise national schools. 

(4) To organise the Depressed Classes for a better life, to improve 
their social, mental and moral condition to induce them 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


297 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 297 

to send their children to national schools and to provide for them 
the ordinary facilities which the other citizens enjoy. 

Note : Whilst therefore where the prejudice against the 
Untouchables is still strong in places, separate schools and 
separate wells must be maintained out of Congress funds, every 
effort should be made to draw such children to national schools 
and to persuade the people to allow the Untouchables to use the 
common wells. 

(5) To organise the temperance campaign amongst the people addicted 
to the drink habit by house-to-house visits and to rely more upon 
appeal to the drinker in his home than upon picketing. 

(6) To organise village and town Panchayats for the private settlement 
of all disputes, reliance being placed solely upon the force of public 
opinion and the truthfulness of Panchayat decisions to ensure 
obedience to them. 

(7) In order to promote and emphasize unity among all classes and 
races and mutual goodwill, the establishment of which is the aim 
of the movement of non-cooperation, to organise a social service 
department that will render help to all, irrespective of differences, 
in times of illness or accident. 

(8) To continue the Tilak Memorial Swaraj Fund collections and 
call upon every Congressman or Congress sympathiser to pay at 
least a one-hundredth part of his annual income for 1921. Every 
province to send every month twenty-five per cent of its income 
from the Tilak Memorial Swaraj Fund to the All-India Congress 
Committee. 

The above resolution shall be brought before the forthcoming session 
of the All-India Congress Committee for revision if necessary.” 

This programme was placed before the All-India Congress Committee 
at its meeting at Delhi on 20th February 1922 and was confirmed by 
the same. The programme is a very extensive programme and I am not 
concerned with what happened to the whole of it, how it was received 
and how it was worked out. I am concerned with only one item and that 
which relates to the Depressed Classes. 

After it was confirmed by the All-India Congress Committee, the 
Working Committee met at Lucknow in June 1922 and passed the 
following resolution : 

“This Committee hereby appoints a committee consisting of 
Swami Shraddhanandji, Mrs. Sarojini Naidu and Messrs. I. K. 
Yajnik and G. B. Deshpande to formulate a scheme embodying 
practical measures to be adopted for bettering the condition of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


298 


298 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

so-called Untouchables throughout the country and to place it for 
consideration before the next meeting of this Committee, the amount 
to be raised for the scheme to be Rs. 2 lacs for the present.” 

This resolution was placed before the All-India Congress Committee 
at its meeting in Lucknow in June 1922. It accepted the resolution with 
the amendent that “the amount to be raised for the scheme should be 
5 lacs for the present”, instead of 2 lacks as put forth in the resolution 
of the Working Committee. How did this programme fare, what practical 
measures did the Committee suggest and how far were these measures 
given effect to ? These questions one must ask in order to assess the 
work of Mr. Gandhi and the Congress for the Untouchables. 

It seems that before the resolution appointing the Committee 
was adopted by the Working Committee, one of its Members Swami 
Shradhanand tendered his resignation of the membership of the 
Committee. For one finds that at the very sitting at which the Working 
Committee passed this resolution, another resolution to the following 
effect was passed by the Working Committee : 

“Read letter from Swami Shradhanandji, dated 8th June 1922 
for an advance for drawing up a scheme for depressed classes 
work. Resolved that Mr. Gangadharrao B. Deshpande be appointed 
convener of the sub-committee appointed for the purpose and he be 
requested to convene a meeting at an early date, and that Swami 
Shradhanand’s letter be referred to the sub-committee.” 

The Working Committee met again in July 1922 in Bombay and 
passed the following Resolution : 

“That the General Secretary be asked to request Swami 
Shradhanand to reconsider his resignation and withdraw it and a sum 
of Rs. 500/- be remitted to the Convener, Shri G. B. Deshpende, for 
the contingent expenses of the Depressed Classes Sub-Committee.” 

The year 1922 thus passed away without anything being done to 
further that item of the Bardoli Programme which related to the Depressed 
Classes. The year 1923 came on. The Working Committee met at Gaya 
in January 1923 and passed the following resolution : 

“With reference to Swami Shraddhanand’s resignation, resolved 
that the remaining members of the Depressed Classes Sub-Committee 
do form the Committee and Mr. Yajnik be the convener.” 

The All-India Congress Committee met in Feb. 1923 at Bombay and 
seeing that nothing was done as yet, recorded the following resolution : 

“Resolved that the question of the condition of the Untouchables 
be referred to the Working Committee for necessary action.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


299 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 299 

What did the Working Committee do then? It met at Poona on 
the 17th April 1923 and resolved as follows: 

“Resolved that while some improvement has been effected in 
the treatment of the so-called Untouchables in response to the 
policy of the Congress this Committee is conscious that much 
work remains yet to be done in this respect and inasmuchas 
this question of untouchability concerns the Hindu community 
particularly, it requests the All-India Hindu Mahasabha also to 
take up this matter and to make strenuous efforts to remove this 
evil from amidst the Hindu community.” 

Thus came to an end the Constructive Programme undertaken 
by Mr. Gandhi and the Congress for the Untouchables. The Bardoli 
programme for the Untouchables was in no sense a revolutionary 
programme. It did attempt to abolish untouchability. It does not 
attempt to break up caste. There is no mention of intermarriage or 
interdinning. It accepts the principle of separate wells and separate 
schools for Untouchables. It was purely an ameliorative programme. 
And yet such a harmless programme the Congress failed to carry 
through. 

It must further be remembered that this was a time when the 
Congress was on the war path. It was determined to fight British 
Imperialism and was most anxious to draw every community towards 
itself and make all disaffected towards the British. This was the 
time when the Congress could have been expected to show to the 
Untouchables that the Congress stood for them and was prepared 
to serve them in the same way that it was prepared to serve the 
Musalmans. There could be no more propitious circumstance which could 
make the Hindus overcome their antipaty towards the Untouchables 
and undertake to serve. But even such propitious circumstance did 
not prove sufficient to energize Congressmen to do this small bit for 
the Untouchables. How hard must be the anti- social feelings of the 
Hindus against the Untouchables that even the highest bliss and the 
greatest stimulant, namely the prospect of winning, Swaraj, were not 
sufficient to dissolve that spirit. The tragedy and the shamelessness 
of this failure by the Congress to carry through their programme for 
the Untouchables is aggravated by the way in which the matter was 
disposed of. 

The work of the amelioration of the Untouchables could not have 
been left in worse hands. If there is any body which is quite unfit for 
addressing itself to the problem of the Untouchables, it is the Hindu 
Mahasabha. It is a militant Hindu organization. Its aim and object 
is to conserve in every way everything that is Hindu, religious and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


300 


300 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

culture. It is not a social reform association. It is a purely political 
organization whose main object and aim is to combat the influence of 
the Muslims in Indian politics. Just to preserve its political strength it 
wants to maintain its social solidarity and its way to maintain social 
solidarity is not to talk about caste or untouchability. How such a 
body could have been selected by the Congress for carrying on the 
work of the Untouchables passes my comprehension. This shows that 
the Congress wanted somehow to get rid of an inconvenient problem 
and wash its hands of it. The Hindu Mahasabha, of course, did not 
come forth to undertake the work and the Congress had merely 
passed a pious resolution recommending the work to them without 
making any promise for financial provision. So the project came to 
an inglorious and ignominious end. Yet there will not be wanting 
thousands of Congressmen who would not be ashamed to boast that 
the Congress has been fighting for the cause of the Untouchables and 
what is worse is that there will not be wanting hundreds of foreigners 
who are ready to believe it under the false propaganda carried on by 
men like Charles F. Andrews, who is the friend of Mr. Gandhi and 
who thinks that to popularize Gandhi in the Western World is his 
real mission in life. 1 

It is not enough to know that the effort failed and had to be wound 
up. It is necessary to inquire why Swami Shradhanand resigned and 
refused to serve on the proposed Committee. There must be some good 
reason for it. For the Swami was the most enlightened Arya Samajist 
and very conscientiously believed in the removal of untouchability. On 
this point, the correspondence that passed between the Swami and 
the General Secretary to the All India Congress Committee throws 
a flood of light on the mentality of the Congressmen and I make no 
apology for reproducing below the whole of it. 

SWAMIJI’S LETTER 


The General Secretary, 

All-India Congress Committee, 

Camp Delhi. 

I acknowledge, with thanks, receipt of your letters No. 331 and 332 
embodying resolutions of the working committee and of the A.I.C.C. 
about untouchability. I observe with pain, that the resolution of the 
A.I.C.C. as at present worded, does not include the whole of what 
was passed by the committee. 

1 Mr. Andrews once went to the length of defending the Caste system. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


301 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 301 

The facts are these. I sent the following letter to Mr. Vithalbhai 
Patel, the then General Secretary on 23rd May 1922, which was also 
published by the principal dailies of the country. 

“My dear Mr. Patel, there was a time (vide Young India of 25th 
May, 1921) when Mahatmaji put the question of untouchability 
in the forefront of the Congress Programme. I find now that the 
question of raising the Depressed Classes has been relegated to an 
obscure corner. While Khadi claims the attention of some of our 
best workers and liberal sum has been earmarked for it, for the 
year, while a strong sub-committee has been appointed to look after 
national education and a special appeal for funds is to be made for 
the same, the question of the removal of untouchability has been 
shelved by making small grants to Ahmedabad, Ahmednagar and 
Madras. I am of opinion that with a majority of 6 crores of our 
brethren set against us by the beauracracy even the Khadi Scheme 
cannot succeed completely. The Members of the Working Committee, 
perhaps, do not know that on this side our suppressed brethren are 
leaving off Khadi and taking to buying cheap foreign cloth. I want 
to move the following resolution in the meeting of the A.I.C.C, which 
comes off on the 7th of June next at Lucknow. 

“That a Sub-committee, consisting of three members of the 
A.I.C.C, be appointed to give effect to the resolution about the so- 
called Depressed Classes, that a sum of five Lakhs of rupees be 
placed at their disposal for propaganda work and that in future all 
applications for grants be referred to the said Sub-committee for 
disposal.” 

My proposal was amended by the Working Committee and ran as 
follows : 

“This Committee hereby appoints a committee consisting of Swami 
Shradhanand, Mrs. Sarojini Naidu and Messrs. G. B. Deshpande and 
I. K. Yajnik to formulate a scheme embodying practical measures to 
be adopted for bettering the condition of the so-called Untouchables 
throughout the country and to place it for consideration before the 
next meeting of the Working Committee, the amount to be raised 
for the scheme to be Rs. 2 lakhs for the present.” 

Mr. Patel asked me to accept the Working Committee’s proposed 
resolution in toto. I refused to accept the Working Committee’s resolution 
and in the very first sitting of the All India Congress Committee 
substituted 5 lakhs for 2 lakhs with the condition that one lakh of the 
same be allotted by the A.I.C.C, out of the funds in its hands, in cash 
and an appeal be made for the balance. 

Mr. Rajagopalachariar, on behalf of the Working Committee 
proposed that instead of fixing the amount to be allotted out of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


302 


302 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Congress funds now, it should be provided that when the Scheme was 
accepted by the Working Committee, that Committee should allot as 
much cash as it could then spare for this purpose. I do not recollect 
the exact words but the support of the amendment as given above is, 
to my knowledge, true. 

On this an uproar arose and the query was pressed from all sides that 
the cash balance in the hands of the A.I.C.C. ought to be announced. The 
President called me aside and told me in confidence that the Congress 
possessed very little cash balance and if pressed to disclose the true 
state of affairs, it would harm the movement as outsiders and even 
C.I.D. people were also present. On this I accepted the amendment of 
Mr. Rajgopalchariar in spite of protests from my seconder and supporters. 
But my surprise was great when I found the resolution in the dailies, 
as reported by the associated press, shorn of Mr. Rajagopalchariar’s 
amendment. 

After the above resolution was passed, some members suggested 
that a convener of the Sub-committee ought to be appointed, serveral 
members proposed me as the convener. On this Mr. Vithalbhai Patel 
(the then General Secretary) got up and said, “As Swami Shradhanand’s 
name occurs first, naturally he will be the convener and therefore there 
was no need of moving any fresh resolution at all.” 

Members from all parts of the country began to give information to 
me about untouchability in their provinces and pressed me to visit their 
parts. On this I made some promises. Then, I thought, that without some 
cash for preliminary expenses no enquiries, on the spot could be made 
and hence no proper scheme formulated. I also learnt that Rs. 25,000/- 
had been voted by the Working Committee for “the Independent ” of 
Allahabad and that an application for grant of Rs. 10,000/- to the Urdu 
daily “ Congress ” of Delhi had been placed by Hakim Ajmal Khan and 
Dr. Ansari before the Working Committee. So, considering, that after 
all, the Congress might not be so hard pressed for cash, I wrote a letter 
addressed to the President asking him to give the Untouchability Sub- 
Committee an advance of Rs. 10,000/- for preliminary expenses. 

After all this, the following resolution of the Working Committee 
forwarded by your letter No. 331 is very interesting reading: 

“Read letter from Swami Shradhanand dated 8th June 1922 for 
an advance for drawing up a scheme for Depressed Class work — 
Resolved that Mr. Gangadharrao B. Deshpande be appointed convener 
of the Sub-committee appointed for the purpose and he be requested 
to convene a meeting at an early date, and that Swami Shradhanand’s 
letter be referred to the Sub-committee.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


303 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 303 

There is another matter which is inexplicible. After my first letter 
had been acknowledged I addressed the following letter from Hardwar 
on 3rd June 1922 : 

“My dear Mr. Patel, I shall leave Hardwar the day after tomorrow 
and reach Lucknow on the morning of June 6th. You know, by now, 
that I feel the most for the so-called Depressed Classes. Even in 
the Punjab I find that no attention worth the name has been paid 
to this item of the constructive programme. In the U.P. of course it 
will be an uphill work. But there is another very serious difficulty. 

The Bardoli programme, in its note under item 4, lays down that 
where prejudice is still strong, separate wells and separate schools must 
be maintained out of the Congress funds. This leaves a loophole for those 
Congress workers who are either prejudiced against the Depressed Classes 
or are weak, and no work can be done in inducing people to agree to 
allow the Untouchables to draw water from common wells. In the Bijnoor 
District, I learn, there was no restriction and the Untouchables drew 
water freely from common wells. But in some places fresh prejudice is 
being engendered under the aegis of the Bardoli resolution note. In my 
recent visits to Ambala Cantt., Ludhiana, Batala, Lahore, Amritsar and 
Jandiala, I found that the question of the removal of disabilities of the 
Untouchables is being ignored. In and near Delhi it is the Dalitodhar 
Sabha, of which I am the President, rather than the Congress which 
is doing appreciable work. I think that unless item (4) of the Bardoli 
constructive programme is amended in proper form, the work, which I 
consider to be the most important plank in the Congress programme, 
will suffer. 

Kindly place the following proposal before the President and if he 
allows it to be placed before the next meeting of the A.I.C.C. I shall 
move it there — “Instead of the Note under item (4) of the Bardoli 
resolution, substitute the following Note : “The following demands of 
the Depressed Classes ought to be complied with at once namely that 
(a) they are allowed to sit on the same carpet with citizens of other 
classes, (b) they get the right to draw water from common wells and 
(c) their children get admission into National schools and Colleges and 
are allowed to mix freely with students drawn from the so-called higher 
castes. I want to impress upon the members of the A.I.C.C. the great 
importance of this item. I know of cases where the Depressed Classes 
are in open revolt against tyranny of the so-called upper castes and 
unless the above demands are conceded to them they will succumb to 
the machinations of the bureaucracy.” After my first proposals were 
passed in the A.I.C.C. Meeting on June 7th at Lucknow, I asked 
Mr. Patel to put my proposed amendmant of Note to item (4) of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


304 


304 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Bardoli resolution before the meeting. He told me that the Working 
Committee would refer it to the Sub-committee and asked me not to 
press it there. I agreed. But I have not received copy of any resolution 
of the Working Committee referring my proposal to the Untouchability 
Sub -committee . 

The untouchability question is very acute in and near Delhi and I have 
to grapple with it at once. But the Sub-committee cannot begin work off- 
hand because the Working Committee has to take several other political 
situations in the country into consideration before deciding upon any 
scheme of practical measures to be adopted for uprooting untouchability 
on behalf of the Congress. Under these circumstances I cannot be of any 
use to the Sub-committee and beg to resign from membership. 

Yours sincerely, 

Delhi, Jan. 30. Shradhanand Sanyasi. 


SECRETARY’S REPLY 

Dear Swamiji, 

Your letter dated June 1922 received in my office on the 30th of that 
month has, by a resolution of the Working Committee passed in Bombay 
on the 18th instant, been referred to me with instructions to explain 
facts and request you to be good enough to reconsider your resignation 
from the Depressed Classes Sub -Committee. 

As you are aware, I have no personal knowledge of the facts which 
happened prior to my release from the jail. But I was present at the meeting 
of the Working Committee which passed the resolution dated 10th June 
1922 appointing Mr. Deshpande as the Convener of the Sub -committee. 
It was not then mentioned that there was any understanding about any 
particular member acting as the Convener of the Sub -committee and the 
whole resolution was passed merely to complete the necessary formalities 
in regard to the payment of money. It was felt that a formal resolution 
of the Sub-committee was necessary before any expenditure could be 
sanctioned. Mr. Deshpande was accordingly appointed as the convener and 
a sum of Rs. 500/- was voted for the expenses of these preliminary steps. 
By an oversight the resolution as drafted omitted to mention the sanction 
of Rs. 500/-. You will thus observe that it was not due to the unwillingness 
of Working Committee to sanction Rs. 10,000/- for untouchability, but 
the true reason for framing the resolution in the manner it was framed 
was what I have explained above. Nothing could be farther from the 
intention of the Working Committee than a desire to understand the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


305 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 305 

importance of the work your Sub -committee was called upon to do or in 
any way to ignore the valuable advice tendered by you. On your letter 
being placed before the last meeting of the Working Committee the 
omission of the grant of Rs. 500/- was supplied, and I was instructed 
to communicate with you on the subject. It will be a great pity if the 
Sub-committee is deprived of the benefit of your experience and special 
knowledge of the whole question of untouchability and I will ask you 
therefore in the public interest to reconsider your decision and wire 
to my office at Allahabad withdrawing your resignation from the Sub- 
Committee. I need hardly add that any resolutions arrived at by your 
Sub -Committee will receive all the consideration they deserve at the 
hands of the Working Committee. 

As to the alteration in the Working Committee’s resolution in regard 
to separate wells and schools, the best course would be for your Sub- 
Committee to recommend the change and for the Working Committee 
to adopt it. 

I am afraid you are under a misapprehension as regards the grant to 
‘The Independent ’ , of Allahabad, and “The Congress” of Delhi. In reference 
to the former, all that has been done is to sanction the application of 
the U. P. Provincial Committee to advance as a loan to the “nationalist 
journals” Ltd., Rs. 25,000 from the funds already granted to that 
committee and in reference to the latter, the application for a grant of 
a loan was wholly rejected. 

Yours sincerely, 
Motilal Nehru. 

Bombay, July 23, 1922. General Secretary. 


SWAMIJI’S REJOINDER 

Dear Pandit Motilalji, 

I received your letter of 23rd July 1922 addressed from Bombay on 
my resignation from the Untouchability Sub-Committee. I am sorry I 
am unable to reconsider it because some of the facts brought out by me 
in my first letter have simply been ignored. 

(1) Kindly enquire of Mr. Rajagopalchariar whether I did not 
first propose that at least one lakh should be given in cash out of 
the funds in the hands of the A.I.C.C, whether he did not move an 
amendment substituting words for the above which purported to promise 
that when the plan of work formulated by the Sub-Committee was 
accepted by the Working Committee, that Committee would allot as 
much money for the untouchability department as it could then spare 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


306 


306 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and whether I did not accept his amendment when the President 
called me aside and explained the exact financial position at the time. 
If this is the fact then why did the amendment not appear with the 
resolution? 

(2) Did you enquire of Mr. Vithalbhai J. Patel whether the members 
of the A.I.C.C. did not propose me as the convener of the Sub-Committee 
and whether he did not then say — “As Swami Shradhanand’s name 
occurs first, naturally he will be the convener and therefore there was 
no need of moving any fresh resolution at all” I enquired about this 
from Dr. Ansari and he wrote back to me on June 17th, 1922 saying 
that I was appointed convener. Dr. Ansari is with you and you can 
verify it from him. I hope Mr. Patel has not forgotten all about it. 

(3) Then the immediate work among the Untouchables here is very 
urgent and I can not delay it for any reason whatever. Kindly have my 
resignation accepted in the next meeting of the Working Committee, 
so that I may be free to work out my own plan about the removal 
of untouchability. This was my position at the end of July last. My 
experience in the Amritsar and Mianwali jails and the information I 
gathered there, have confirmed me in the belief that unless sexual 
purity (Brahmacharya) is revived on the ancient Aryan lines and the 
curse of untouchability is blotted out of the Indian society, no efforts 
of the Congress nor of other patriotic organisations out of the Congress 
will avail in their efforts for the attainment of Swaraj. And as national 
self realization and virile existence is impossible without Swaraj, I, as 
a Sanyasi, should devote the rest of my life to this sacred cause — the 
cause of sexual purity and true national unity. 


Delhi, July 23, 1922. Shradhananda Sanyasi. 

This shows what heart Congressmen had in the uplift work of the 
Untouchables. 


2 

So much for what Congressmen volunteered to do. How much did 
congressmen or Mr. Gandhi help the Untouchables who were working 
independently for the uplift of their own people. This was the period 
when the Untouchables themselves were on the warpath. They too 
were engaged in offering civil disobedience against the Hindus for the 
purpose of acquiring their civic and social rights. This was the period 
during which the Untouchables of Bombay Presidency had launched 
their Satyagraha at Mahad for establishing their right to take water 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


307 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 307 

from the public tank and at Nasik for establishing their right to enter a 
Hindu temple. How did Mr. Gandhi look upon this Satyagraha movement 
started by the Untouchables against the caste Hindus ? The attitude of 
Mr. Gandhi to say the least was extremely queer. 

In the first place Mr. Gandhi condemned this Satyagraha by the 
Untouchables against the caste Hindus. He would not support it. In this 
controversy the Untouchables were perfectly logical. They argued that 
if Civil Disobedience was the weapon which, according to Mr. Gandhi, 
the Hindus could legitimately use against the British for securing 
their freedom, why were the Untouchables not justified in using the 
same wapon gainst the caste Hindus for securing their emancipation. 
However good this logic Mr. Gandhi would have none of it. He tried to 
meet their logic by his logic. He argued that Untouchability was the 
sin of the Hindus. It is the Hindus who must therefore do penance. It 
is they who must offer Satyagraha for the removal of untouchability. 
Satyagraha was not the business of the Untouchables because they were 
not sinners, far from being sinners they were sinned against. This was 
of course not Aristotalian logic. It is a Mahatmian logic which is another 
name for casuistry. But it was apparent that this Mahatmian logic was 
simply nonsense. The Untouchables replied that if that was the view of 
Mr. Gandhi — namely that Satyagraha is penance which is for the sinner 
to offer — then why should he call upon the Hindus to offer Satyagraha 
against the British. British Imperialism was the sin of the British and 
therefore according to his logic the Satyagraha must be offered by the 
British and not by the caste Hindus. The Untouchables had destroyed 
his logic. It was clear that there was either a fallacy or insincerity in 
this attitude of Mr. Gandhi to Satyagraha by the Untouchables against 
caste Hindus. But the Untouchables could not dislodge Mr. Gandhi from 
the position of hostility which he had adopted. 

There is another incosistency in the attitude which Mr. Gandhi 
showed towards the Satyagraha by the Untouchables against Caste 
Hindus at Mahad and Nasik and the attitude he showed against 
similar Satyagraha by the Untouchables at Vaikom. Mr. Gandhi was 
in favour of the Satyagraha at Vaikom. He blessed it and encouraged 
it. Why then was Mr. Gandhi opposed to the Satyagraha at Mahad 
and Nasik ? Was there any difference between the two ? Yes, there 
was. The Vaikom Satyagraha was carried on by the Untouchables 
under the auspices of the Congress. The other two were launched by 
the Untouchables independently of the Congress. Had the opposition 
of Mr. Gandhi something to do with this difference ? As Mr. Gandhi 
has given no answer I must leave the reader to make the best guess. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


308 


308 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Perhaps Mr. Gandhi was not prepared to protect the lambs who would 
not accept him as their shepherd. When Mr. Gandhi refused to give 
his blessings to the Satyagraha by the Untouchables it was a foregone 
conclusion that no Congressmen would or could come and help the 
Untouchables in their struggle against the orthodox Hindus. Indeed this 
attitude of Mr. Gandhi enabled Congress Hindus to join the orthodox 
Hindus — they are kith and kin and the line that divides the two is very 
thin — and batter the heads of the Untouchables with a clear conscience. 
This was not the only mischief Mr. Gandhi did by his most illogical if 
not perverse attitude. He came out openly against all non-Hindus and 
prohibited them from helping the Untouchables in their Satyagraha 
struggle against the caste Hindus. He was not only against Mahomedans, 
Christians, Parsis and Jews rendering any help, but he went to the 
length of objecting to the Sikhs — who are no more than militant and 
protestant Hindus — coming to help the Untouchables. Here again his 
argument was queer. Untouchability is the sin of the caste Hindus. It is 
they who must do penance. Help to the Untouchables being a penance 
and penance being the obligation of the sinner, only the sinner could 
offer Satyagraha and help it. The Mahomedans, Christians, Parsis, Jews 
and Sikhs were not sinners in the matter of untouchability and therefore 
they could not help the Satyagraha for the removal of untouchability. 
Mr. Gandhi of course would not see it from the point of view of the 
Untouchables. He would not see that what was sin for the caste Hindus 
was slavery for the Untouchables. If the sinner was bound to do penance, 
the slave was entitled to break his bonds and every person who believed 
in freedom, no matter what his caste or his creed, was bound to help 
and free to join in the struggle. This is exactly the point of view which 
Mr. Gandhi had adopted with regard to the Khilafat question. The 
Musalman wanted Khilafat and the territorial integrity of Turkey. 
The demand for territorial integrity of Turkey was a most impossible 
demand because it involved the subjugation of the Arabs by the Turks. 
Still the Musalmans insisted upon it and Mr. Gandhi brought round 
the whole of the Congress and the Hindus to support this impossible 
and impious demand of the Musalmans. Mr. Gandhi then argued that 
if the Musalmans think it their religious duty to fight for the territorial 
integrity of Turkey, then it was the obligation of the Hindus to help the 
Muslims to fulfil their duty . 1 

1 At the special session of the Congress held at Calcutta in 1920 a resolution was 
passed of which the following is a part : 

“In view of the fact that on the Khilafat question both Indian and Imperial Governments 
have signally failed in their duty towards the Musalmans of India, and the Prime Minister 
has deliberately broken his pledged word given to them, and that it is the duty of every 
non-Moslem India in every legitimate manner to assist his Musalman brother in his 
attempt to remove the religious calamity that has overtaken him. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


309 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 309 

The benefit of this logic Mr. Gandhi was not prepared to extend to 
the Untouchables. He was firm. Non-Hindus may help Hindus. Hindus 
may help non-Hindus. But none should help the Untouchables. 1 Friends 
of Mr. Gandhi were anxious to soften the rigour of his logic by pointing 
out that a distinction was necessary to be made on the basis of the 
nature of the disabilities of the Untouchables. They argued 1 that certain 
disabilities of the Untouchables were civic, certain were religious and 
that so far as the civic disabilities were concerned even non-Hindus 
should be allowed to help the Untouchables to carry on the Satyagraha. 
Even to this Mr. Gandhi was not prepared to listen. His interdict was 
applicable to all cases and there was no distinction possible. With this 
interdict on outside help Mr. Gandhi — the “friend of the Untouchables” — 
completely cut off the supplies of the Untouchables and left them without 
any sinews of war. 

3 

So far I have explained how the Congress without any qualm of 
conscience abandoned the idea of uplifting the Untouchables. It did not 
even undertake it. Secondly I have explained how Mr. Gandhi failed 
to support the Untouchables in their Satyagraha against the caste 
Hindus but by his queer logic found justification for not helping them 
and for preventing help reaching them. There now remains to record 
the third and the last event which belongs to this period. Though last 
in point of time it is undoubtedly the first in point of importance. That 
incident is the touchstone by which Mr. Gandhi’s claim as a friend of 
the Untouchables must stand or fall. 

The incident relates to the demand made by the Representatives of 
the Depressed Classes at the Indian Round Table Conference for political 
safeguards being embodied in the new Constitution and the attitude of 
Mr. Gandhi to these demands. The most important of these demands 
related to representation of the Depressed Classes in the Legislatures. 
The demand submitted by the representatives of the Depressed Classes 
was in the following terms — 

Adequate Representation in the Legislatures. 

The Depressed Classes must be given sufficient political power to 
influence legislative and executive action for the purpose of securing 
their welfare. In view of this they demand that provisions shall be made 
in the electoral law to give them : 

(1) Right to adequate representation in the Legislatures of the 
Country, Provincial and Central. 

1 Young India. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


310 


310 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(2) Right to elect their own men as their representatives, 

(a) by adult suffrage and 

(b) by separate electorates for the first ten years and thereafter 
by joint electorates and reserved seats, it being understood 
that joint electorates shall not be forced upon the Depressed 
Classes against their will unless such joint electorates are 
accompanied by adult suffrage.” 

It is this particular demand by the Depressed Classes which raised 
such a storm and which became so serious ar issue that the solution of 
it almost shook the foundation of Indian politics and of Hindu Society. 

This demand of the Depressed Classes was founded on the 
recommendation of the Simon Commission. After a careful survey of the 
problem of the Depressed Classes, the Simon Commission had reported 
to the following effect regarding their place under the new Constitution : 

“It is clear that even with a considerable lowering of the franchize 

there would be no hope of the Depressed Classes getting their 

own representatives elected in general constituencies without special 

provision being made to secure it Ultimately we should hope 

to see them maintaining their ground in joint electorates without 

special protection They will make no headway, however, in this 

direction as long as they are represented solely by nomination, for 
nomination provides no opportunities for training them in politics. 
There are, even with the present restricted franchise, a sufficient 
number of Depressed Class voters to make methods of election 
possible 

Our object, therefore, is to make a beginning which will bring 
the Depressed Classes within the circle of elected representation. 
How is this to be done ? Most of the Depressed Class associations 
which appeared before us favoured separate electorates, with seats 

allocated on the basis of population separate electorates would 

no doubt be the safest method of securing the return of an adequate 
number of persons who enjoy the confidence of the Depressed 
Classes; but we are averse from stereotyping the difference between 
the Depressed Classes and the remainder of the Hindus by such a 
step, which we consider would introduce a new and serious bar to 
their ultimate political amalgamation with others 

Our proposal, therefore, is that in all the eight Provinces there 

should be some reservation of seats for the Depressed Classes 

The result of our Scheme would be that spokesmen of the 
Depressed Classes would be returned as elected members in each of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


311 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 311 

the Provinces As to the number of seats to be reserved, this 

should obviously bear some proportion to the total number of the 

Depressed Classes in the province We propose that the 

proportion of the number of such reserved seats to the total seats 
in all the Indian General constituencies should be three quarters 
of the proportion of the Depressed Classes population to the total 
population of the electoral area of the province.” 1 

As a matter of fact there was nothing new in this demand of the 
Depressed Classes for separate political representation for themselves 
by themselves and through themselves and the Simon Commission in 
conceding it cannot be said to have made a new departure. 

This demand was put forth in 1919. 

At the time when the reforms which subsequently became embodied 
in the Act of 1919 were being discussed, the authors of the Montague 
Chelmsford Report clearly recognized the problem of the Untouchables 
and the authors pledged themselves to make the best arrangement for 
their representation in the Legislatures. But the Committee that was 
appointed under the Chairmanship of Lord Southborough to devise 
the franchise and the electoral system ignored them altogether. The 
Government of India did not approve of this attitude and made the 
following comments : 

“They (Untouchables) are one-fifth of the total population and 
have not been represented at all in the Morley-Minto Councils. 

The Committee’s report mentions the Untouchables twice, but 
only to explain that in the absence of satisfactory electorates 
they have been provided for by nomination. It does not discuss 
the position of these people, or their capacity for looking after 
themselves. Nor does it explain the amount of nomination which 

it suggests for them The measure of representation which 

they propose suggested that one-fifth of the entire population 

of British India should be allotted seven seats out of practically 
eight hundred. It is true that in all the Councils there will be, 
roughly speaking, a one-sixth proportion of officials who may be 
expected to bear in mind their interests; but that arrangement 
is not, in our opinion, what the Report on reforms aims at. The 
authors stated that the Untouchables also should learn the lesson 
of self-protection. It is surely fanciful to hope that this result can 
be expected from including a single member of the community in 
an assembly where there are sixty or seventy caste Hindus. To 
make good the principles of the Report we must treat the outcastes 
more generously.” 


Report. Vol. II. pp. 65-66. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


312 


312 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Government recommended that the seats allotted to the 
Untouchables by the Committee should be doubled. Accordingly in place 
of seven, they were given fourteen seats. 

Again in 1923, the Secretary of State appointed a Committee which is 
known as the Muddiman Committee. The principal object of the Committee 
was to find out how far the constitution established by the Act of 1919 
could be expanded by alterations in the Rules and without altering the 
Act. The Committee made certain recommendations and pointed out the 
necessity of increasing the representation of the Depressed Classes in 
the Legislatures. This recommendation was accepted by the Secretary 
of State who increased the number of seats. 

Thus the right of the Depressed Classes to special representation 
in the Legislature had become a principle which was not only accepted 
but adopted in the Constitution. So well was this principle recognized 
that it had been extended even to District Local Boards, School Boards 
and Municipalities. 

A claim which had been given legal recognition in 1919 and which 
had thereby become a right and which had become perfected by user 
the representatives of the Depressed Classes felt could not be disputed 
by any body. There was no reason to fear that the Congress would come 
forward seriously to dispute this right of the Depressed Classes. Because 
although the Nehru Committee in 1929 in the Swaraj Constitution which 
it was asked to frame had denied this right to the Depressed Classes, 
the report of that Committee was not binding on the Congress. The 
Congress was bound by nothing except its own resolution which was 
passed in 1920, at its Nagpur Session to allay the fears of the Sikhs, 
and which had declared its policy to treat all minorities alike in the 
matter of representation in the Legislature 1 . 

The representatives of the Depressed Classes were therefore justified 
in hoping that their demand would go through without any difficulty 
whatsoever from any quarters. 

At the first Round Table Conference things went very smoothly. 
There was no trouble of any kind and although there was no 
agreement on the minorities question, the right of the Depressed 
Classes to special representation was accepted by all sections that were 
represented at the Round Table Conference. The conclusions reached 
by the Minorities Sub-Committee were embodied in its report which 

1 The text of the resolution is as follows : 

The Sikhs 

“In view of the fact that misunderstanding exist among the Sikhs as to the position of 
their community in the future polity of India, this Congress assures the Sikhs that their 
interests will receive the same protection in any Scheme of Swaraj for India as is provided 
for Mahomedan and other minorities in provinces other than the Punjab.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


313 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 313 

was presented to the General Conference. The following are the 
extracts from that report : 

“There was general agreement with the recommendation of Sub- 
Committee No. II (Provincial Constitution) that the representation 
on the Provincial Executives of important minority communities 
was a matter of the greatest practical importance for the successful 
working of the new constitution, and it was also agreed that, on 
the same grounds, Mohammadans should be represented on the 
Federal Executive. On behalf of the smaller minorities a claim 
was put forward for their representation, either individually or 
collectively, on the Provincial and Federal Executives, or that, 
if this should be found impossible, in each Cabinet there should 
be a Minister specially charged with the duty of protecting 
minority interests. (Dr. Ambedkar and Sardar Ujjal Singh would 
add the words “and other important minorities” after the word 
Mohammadans in line 6). 

The difficulty of working jointly responsible Executives under such 
a scheme as this was pointed out.” 

“The discussion in the Sub-Committee has enabled the 
Delegates to face the difficulties involved in the schemes put up, 
and though no general agreement has been reached, its necessity 
has become more apparent than ever.” 

“It has also been made clear that the British Government 
cannot, with any chance of agreement, impose upon the communities 
an electoral principle which, in some feature or other, would be 
met by their opposition. It was therefore plain, that, failing an 
agreement, separate electorates, with all their drawbacks and 
difficulties, would have to be retained as the basis of the electoral 
arrangements under the new constitution. From this the question 
of proportions would arise. Under these circumstances, the claims 
of the Depressed Classes will have to be considered adequately.” 

“The Sub-Committee, therefore, recommend that the Conference 
should register an opinion that it was desirable that an agreement 
upon the claims made to it should be reached, and that the 
negotiations should be continued between the representatives 
concerned, with a request that the result of their efforts should be 
reported to those engaged in the next stage of these negotiations.” 

Mr. Gandhi was not present at the first Round Table Conference 
because the Congress had boycotted it. He came for the Second Round 
Table Conference. What attitude did Mr. Gandhi take to this claim 
of the Depressed Classes ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


314 


314 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Every body expected that Mr. Gandhi would be more interested in seeing 
that the constitution that was likely to emerge from these deliberations 
and negotiations was a constitution which gave India Puma Swaraj i.e. 
complete independence and he would not interest himself in so unimportant 
a subject as the allocation of seats among the different minorities. But 
events completely falsified these hopes. Mr. Gandhi completely gave up 
his fight against British Imperialism altogether. He forgot that he had 
come with a mandate 1 to secure a constitution which contained Puma 
Swaraj. He left that issue and started fighting the minorities and what 
is so strange he concentrated all his fire upon the representatives of the 
Untouchables for daring to put forth the claim for special representation. 
Mr. Gandhi opposed tooth and nail the representatives of the Depressed 
Classes. He was not even prepared to look at their claim. He was annoyed 
at their impudence and the whole Conference was astonished by his 
opposition. They could not understand how a man like Mr. Gandhi who 
posed himself as the friend of the Untouchables could in fact be so great an 
enemy of their interests. His friends were completely baffled. Mr. Gandhi 
was prepared to recognize a similar right claimed by the Musalmans and 
to the Sikhs and although he was not prepared to recognize a similar 
claim by Christians, Europeans and Anglo-Indians he was not going to 
oppose their claim. Mr. Gandhi’s friends could not understand how he 
could deny a similar right to the Untouchables. The Mohamedans, Sikhs, 
Christians, Europeans and Anglo-Indians were far better off than the 
Untouchables. The former were economically far better placed. The latter 
were poorest of the poor. The former were educationally advanced, the 
latter were educationally most backward. The former were socially well 
respected, the latter were socially despised. The former enjoyed a position 
of free citizens. The latter were suffering from certain disabilities. The 
former were not subjected to social tyranny and social boycott but social 
tyranny and social boycott were the every day lot of the latter. Having 
regard to this difference in status there could never be any doubt that 
if there was any section of the Indian people whose case called forth 

1 The following resolution embodies the mandate which the Congress imposed upon 
Mr. Gandhi when he was chosen by the Congress as its delegate. (This was a resolution 
passed at the Karachi Congress). 

“This Congress, having considered the provisional settlement between the Working 
Committee and the Government of India, endorses it, and desires to make it clear that 
the Congress goal of Puma Swaraj, meaning complete independence, remains intact. In 
the event of a way remaining otherwise open to the Congress to be represented at any 
conference with the representatives of the British Government, the Congress delegation 
will work for this goal, and in particular so as to give the nation control over the army, 
external affairs, finance, fiscal and economic policy, and to have a scrutiny by an impartial 
tribunal of the financial transactions of the British Government in India, and to examine 
and assess the obligations to be undertaken by India or England and the right to either 
party to end the partnership at will; provided, however, that the Congress delegation will 
be free to accept such adjustments as may he demonstrably necessary in the interests 
of India.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


315 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 315 

special protection, they were the Untouchables. When his European 
friends tried thus to argue with Mr. Gandhi, Mr. Gandhi used to fly into 
temper and his relations with two of the best of them to my knowledge 
had become quite strained on this account. 

Mr. Gandhi’s anger was largely due to the fact he could give no 
rational answer which could convince his opponents that his opposition 
to the claim of the Depressed Classes was sincere and was founded 
upon the best interests of the Depressed Classes. He nowhere gave a 
consistent explanation of his opposition to the Depressed Classes. Reading 
his speeches in London while he was there one can see that he was 
using three arguments in support of his position. Speaking as a member 
of the Federal Structure Committee of the Round Table Conference 
Mr. Gandhi said : 

“The Congress has from its very commencement taken up the 
cause of the so-called “untouchables”. There was a time when the 
Congress had at every annual session as its adjunct the Social 
Conference, to which the late Ranade had dedicated his energies, 
among his many activities. Headed by him, you will find in the 
programme of the Social Conference, reform in connection with the 
Untouchables taking a prominent place. But in 1920, the Congress 
took a large step, and brought the question of the removal of 
untouchability as a plank on the political platform, and made it an 
important item of the political programme. Just as the Congress 
considered Hindu-Muslim Unity, thereby meaning unity amongst all 
classes, to be indispensable for the attainment of Swaraj, so also 
did the Congress consider the removal of the curse of untouchability 
as an indispensable condition for the attainment of full freedom.” 

At the minorities Sub-Committee of the Round Table Conference 
Mr. Gandhi used another argument. He said : 

“I can understand the claims advanced by other minorities, but 
the claims advanced on behalf of the untouchables is to me the 
“unkindest cut of all”. It means the perpetual barsinister. I would 
not sell the vital interests of the untouchables even for the sake of 
winning the freedom of India. I claim myself, in my own person, 
to represent the vast mass of the untouchables. Here I speak not 
merely on behalf of the Congress, but I speak on my own behalf, 
and I claim that I would get, if there was a referendum of the 
untouchables, their vote, and that I would top the poll. And I would 
work from one end of India to the other to tell the untouchables 
that separate electorates and separate reservation is not the way 
to remove this bar-sinister, which is the shame, not of them, but 
of orthodox Hinduism. Let this committee and let the whole world 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


316 


316 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


know that today there is a body of Hindu reformers who are pledged 
to remove this blot of untouchability. We do not want on our register 
and on our census, untouchables classified as a separate class. Sikhs 
may remain as such in perpetuity, so may Moslems, so may Europeans. 

Will untouchables remain untouchables in perpetuity ? I would far 
rather than Hinduism died than that untouchability lived. Therefore, 
with all my regard for Dr. Ambedkar, and for his desire to see the 
untouchables uplifted, with all my regard for his ability I must say, in 
all humility, that here is a great wrong under which he has laboured 
and, perhaps, the bitter experiences he has undergone have for the 
moment warped his judgment. It hurts me to have to say this but 
I would be untrue to the cause of untouchables, which is as dear to 
me as life itself, if I did not say it. I will not bargain away their 
rights for the kingdom of the whole world. I am speaking with a due 
sense of responsibility, when I say it is not a proper claim which is 
registered by Dr. Ambedkar when he seeks to speak for the whole of 
untouchables in India. It will create a division in Hinduism which I 
cannot possibly look forward to with any satisfaction whatsoever, I do 
not mind the untouchables being converted into Islam or Christianity. 

I should tolerate that but I cannot possibly tolerate what is in store 
for Hinduism if there are these two divisions set forth in the villages. 
Those who speak of political rights of untouchables do not know India 
and do not know how Indian society is today constructed. Therefore, 

I want to say with all the emphasis that I can command that if I 
was the only person to resist this thing I will resist it with my life.” 

At a meeting at the Friends House in London Mr. Gandhi relied upon 
quite a different argument. He is reported to have said 1 : 

“I have told you what is agitating my mind. You may take the 
Congress to be incapable of bartering away the minorities rights. The 
untouchables, I know, as one can claim to know. It would be equal 
to killing them if separate electorates were given them. They are 
at present in the hands of the superior classes. They can suppress 
them completely and wreck vengence upon the untouchables who 
are at their mercy and it is because I want to prevent that thing 
happening that I would fight the demand for separate electorates 
for them. Whilst I am saying this, I know, I am opening out my 
shame to you. But in the existing state of things how could I 
invite destruction for them ? I would not be guilty of that crime . 2 

1 Young India — Nov. 19, 1931. 

2 From this, one is likely to get the impression that Mr. Gandhi was opposed only to 
separate electorates and that Mr. Gandhi was prepared to give to the untouchables joint 
electorates AND RESERVED seats being granted to the untouchables was made clear by 
him at the Round Table Conference. I give below the following extract from his speech in 
the minorities sub-Committee : 

“I would like to repeat what I have said before, that while the Congress will always 
accept any solution that may be acceptable to the Hindus, the Musalmans and the Sikhs, 
the Congress will be no party to special reservation or special electorates for any other 
minorities.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


317 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 317 

Dr. Ambedkar, as able as he is, has unhappily lost his head over 

this question. I repudiate his claim to represent them.” 

None of his arguments carried any conviction. Indeed they could 
not. They were all spacious and they had the ring of special pleadings. 

His first argument, that the Congress was pledged to look after the 
untouchables, to remove their untouchability — Was this argument founded 
in truth ? Mr. Gandhi has been telling the world that the whole body 
of Congress has been pledged to remove untouchability and his friends 
have been giving him credit for getting the Congress to do what the 
Congress before him was not prepared to do. I am surprised how so 
false a view could have been given such a wide currency. I have read 
and re-read the Resolution passed by the Congress in 1920 at Nagpur 
which is the basis of such an assertion as is made by Mr. Gandhi and 
his friends, and I am sure every one who reads that resolution will agree 
that the text of the resolution gives no warrant for such an assertion. 
The resolution is a very clever piece of Gandhian tactics. Mr. Gandhi has 
been very anxious from the very beginning to keep the untouchables a 
close preserve of the Hindus. He did not want Musalmans or Christians 
to be interested in them. He wanted that the Untouchables who were 
attached to the British should be detached from them and attached to 
the Hindus. The second object could be achieved only if the resolution 
in favour of the removal of untouchability was passed from the Congress 
platform. To achieve this it was necessary to confine this duty only to 
the Hindus. This is what the resolution does. It is a clever move on the 
part of a cunning politician. The resolution does not put the Congress 
as a whole behind this resolution. Secondly, in what it does there is 
nothing that is obligatory in it. There is no pledge, there is no vow. 
There is only moral exhortation. It only recommends to the Hindus that 
removal of untouchability is their duty. Once Mr. Gandhi tried to alter 
the conditions for membership of the Congress. Instead of the payment 
of four annas per annum being the condition of membership Mr. Gandhi 
wanted to lay down two conditions : (1) removal of untouchability and 
(2) spinning yarns. Congressmen were prepared to accept spinning 
of yarn as a condition of membership. But they were not prepared 
to accept removal of untouchability as a condition. Congressmen told 
Mr. Gandhi that if he insisted upon it all Congress Committees will have 
to be closed down. So strong was the opposition that Mr. Gandhi had 
to withdraw his proposal. That being the case for Mr. Gandhi to have 
urged before the Round Table Conference that the Congress was pledged 
to remove untouchability and that the untouchables could safely be left 
to the mercy of the Hindus shows that even Mr. Gandhi is capable of 
economising truth to a vanishing point. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


318 


318 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The next argument of Mr. Gandhi that the removal of untouchability 
was made by the Congress a condition precedent to Swaraj urged to 
prove the sincerity of the Congress could not be taken at its face value 
by the obvious insincerity of the Congress and Mr. Gandhi. Untouchability 
was as it had been, yet the Congress and Mr. Gandhi had come forth to 
demand independence. This was enough to show that Mr. Gandhi did 
not believe in what he said on this point. No one in India, at any rate 
no one from among the Untouchables believed in this declaration of Mr. 
Gandhi and his Congress that for them removal of untouchability was a 
condition precedent to Swaraj. Long before the Round Table Conference 
Mr. Gandhi was questioned to test his sincerity on two occasions and 
the answers he gave on both left no doubt that even he did not believe 
this declaration. 

In 1920 a correspondent asked Mr. Gandhi the following question 1 : 

“Should not we the Hindus wash our bloodstained hands before 
we ask the English to wash theirs ?” 

To this Mr. Gandhi gave the following reply : 

“A correspondent indignantly asks me in a pathetic letter 
reproduced elsewhere what I am doing for the (untouchables). I have 
given the letter with the correspondent’s own heading. ‘Should not we 
the Hindus wash our bloodstained hands before we ask the English 
to wash theirs ?’ This is a proper question reasonably put. And if a 
member of a slave nation could deliver the suppressed classes from 
their slavery without freeing myself from my own, I would so do 
today. But it is an impossible task ” 

Does this show that Mr. Gandhi and the Congress were sincere when 
they said that removal of untouchability was a condition precedent to 
Swaraj ? That this is not the argument of a sincere man is shown by the 
fact that at a later time Mr. Gandhi himself has ridiculed a correspondent 
who urged upon Mr. Gandhi the desirability of keeping aside the question 
of the Untouchables until the Hindus had won Swaraj. 

The second occasion on which Mr. Gandhi was questioned was when 
he went to Dandi in March in 1930 to make Salt Satyagraha contrary to 
law. Some Untouchables went to Dandi and questioned him. They asked 
him what happened to his declaration that removal of untouchability 
was condition precedent to Swaraj. Mr. Gandhi’s reply as reported to 
me was this : 

“The Untouchables are a part of a whole. I am working for the 
whole and I therefore believe that I am therefore working for the 
Untouchables who are a part of the whole.” 


Young India, 27th Oct. 1920. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


319 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 319 

There is nothing to prove this except what was reported to me by 
those who had been to see Mr. Gandhi at Dandi. But I have no doubt 
that Mr. Gandhi must have said something to that effect. For what he 
is reported to have said tallies with what he has said in his reply in 
Young India referred to above in reply to the same correspondent. This 
is what Mr. Gandhi then said : 

“ though the Panchama Problem is as dear to me as life 

itself, I rest satisfied with the exclusive attention to non-cooperation. 

I feel sure that the greater includes the less.” 

Are these the answers of a sincere man ? Can a sincere man believe 
that the untouchables are a part of a whole. 

As to his argument that special representation to the untouchables 
would perpetuate the existing separation between the touchables and 
the untouchables was an argument which was absolutely hollow. 
The way to remove untouchability is to introduce intermarriage and 
interdining. The way to remove the disabilities of the untouchables is 
to admit them to the use of the common well and common school. It 
is difficult to understand that special representation can come in the 
way of intermarriage, interdinning and the use of a common well and 
a common school. On the other hand the introduction of these would 
be only way of disproving the necessity of special representation. Had 
Mr. Gandhi and the Congress done anything in this direction ? The 
explanatory note added to the Bardoli resolution shows how far Gandhi 
and the Congress were prepared to go in this direction. The note says : 

“Whilst therefore where the prejudice against the untouchables 
is still strong in places, separate schools and separate wells must 
be maintained out of Congress funds, every effort should be made to 
draw such children to national schools and to persuade the people 
to allow the untouchables to use the common wells.” 

Can it lie in the mouth of persons who want to maintain separate 
wells, separate schools to say that they object to separate representation 
because it will cause separation ? It is only persons who are bent on 
breaking down barriers who can speak against separate representation 
and ask to be believed in the sincerity of their argument. 

Mr. Gandhi’s last argument was a fantastic argument. If the superior 
classes can suppress the untouchables and wreck vengence upon them 
then there is all the greater reason why they should be given special 
representation so that they may protest themselves against the tyranny 
of the superior classes. Mr. Gandhi had become desparate and had 
lost his equanimity and balance to such an extent that he did not 
know where his arguments would lead him. In using this argument he 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


320 


320 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

evidently forgot that he was arguing for the perpetual enslavement of 
the Untouchables by the Hindus. Mr. Gandhi’s argument in short was 
“don’t ask for freedom, because it will enrage your master and he will 
illtreat you”. If such an argument had been advanced by any one else 
he would have been told that he was purile and insincere. 

Having failed to demolish the justice of the claim of the Untouchables 
Mr. Gandhi decided to isolate the representatives of the Depressed 
Classes, to see that they got no support from any other quarter, Gandhi 
planned to break a possible compact between the Depressed Classes and 
the Muslims. A part of the plan was to win over the Musalmans to his 
side and for that purpose he offered to enter into a pact with them. A 
copy of this pact which was circulated among the Muslim delegates came 
into my hands and I reproduce the same here. (This text is reproduced 
below from Dr. Ambedkar’s “What Congress and Gandhi have done to 
the Untouchables”, pp. 72-73 which is not typed in the MS. — Ed.) 

“DRAFT OF GANDHI-MUSFIM PACT 1 

Muslim Delegation to the Round Table Conference 2 
Tel. : Victoria 2360 Queen’s House, 

Telegrams “COURTLIKE” LONDON 57, St. JAMES’ COURT, 

Buckingham Gate, 

London, S. w. 1 
6th October 1931. 

The following proposals were discussed by Mr. Gandhi and the Muslim 
Delegation at 10 p.m. last night. They are divided into two parts — The 
proposals made by the Muslims for safeguarding their rights and the 
proposals made by Mr. Gandhi regarding the Congress policy. They are 
given herewith as approved by Mr. Gandhi, and placed for submission 
to the Muslim Delegation for their opinion. 

MUSLIM PROPOSALS MR. GANDHI’S PROPOSALS 


1. In the Punjab and Bengal bare majority 
of one per cent, of Musalmans but the 
question of whether it should be by means 
of joint electorates and reservation of 
51 per cent, of the whole house should be 
referred to the Musalman voters before 
the new constitution comes into force and 
their verdict should be accepted. 


1. That the Franchise should be 
on the basis of adult suffrage. 

2. No special reservations to any 
other community save Sikhs and 
Hindu Minorities. (Italics are not 
in the original). 


1 This document was printed by me in my Thoughts on Pakistan as Appendix in 1939. 
It was the first time it saw the light of the day. Its genuineness has never been questioned. 
I was able to get a copy from a Hindu Delegate to the Round Table Conference who was 
privileged by the Muslim League to share the secret. 

2 ‘This shows that the document was typed on the stationery of the Muslim League 
Delegation.’ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


321 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 321 


MUSLIM PROPOSALS 


2. In other provinces where the 
Musalmans are in a minority the 
present weightage enjoyed by them to 
continue, but whether the seats should 
be reserved to a joint electorate, or 
whether they should have separate 
electorates should be determined by 
the Musalman voters by a referendum 
under the new constitution, and their 
verdict should be accepted. 

3. That the Musalman representatives 
to the Central Legislature in both 
the houses should be 26 per cent, of 
the total number of the British India 
representatives, and 7 per cent, at least 
by convention should be Musalmans, 
out of the quota that may be assigned 
to Indian States, that is to say, one- 
third of the whole house when taken 
together. 

4. That the residuary power should 
vest in the federating Provinces of 
British India. 

5. That the other points as follows 
being agreed to : 

1. Sindh. 1 

2. N.W.F.P. 2 


MR. GANDHI’S PROPOSALS 

The Congress demands: 

A. Complete Independence. 

B. Complete control over the 
defence immediately. 

C. Complete control over external 
affairs. 

D. Complete control over Finance. 

E. Investigation of public debts 
and other obligations by an 
independent tribunal. 

F. As in the case of a partnership, 
right of either party to terminate 
it. 


3. Services. 3 

4. Cabinet. 4 

5. Fundamental rights and 
safeguards for religion and 
culture. 

6. Safeguards against legislation 
affecting any community. 


1 Stands for separation of Sindh. 

2 Stands for Provincial Autonomy and Responsible Government for the N.W.F. Province. 

3 Stands for Representation in Services. 

4 Stands for Representation in the Cabinet. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


322 


322 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

This is the agreement which Mr. Gandhi was prepared to enter 
with the Musalmans. By this agreement Mr. Gandhi was prepared to 
give to the Musalmans the fourteen points they had been demanding. 
In return Mr. Gandhi wanted the Musalmans among other things to 
agree to continue the benefit of the principle of special representation 
to Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs. Some one might ask what is wrong in 
such an agreement. Has not the Congress said that they will not agree 
to extend communal representation to others besides these three ? Such a 
view cannot but be treated as a superficial view. Those who see nothing 
wrong in it must answer two questions. First is this. Where was the 
necessity for Mr. Gandhi to get the Musalmans to agree to the Congress 
policy of not extending the benefit of special representation to other 
minorities and the untouchables. Mr. Gandhi could have said as the 
Congress had been saying to the other minorities he was not prepared 
to agree to their claim. Why did he want the Musalmans to join him in 
resisting their claim ? And if this was not his object why did he make 
it a term of the agreement which the Musalmans were to perform in 
return for what he agreed to do for them. 

Secondly why did Mr. Gandhi come forward to give the Musalmans 
their fourteen demands at this particular juncture. These fourteen 
political demands of the Musalmans rightly or wrongly were rejected by 
all. They were rejected by the Hindu Maha-Sabha. They were rejected 
by the Simon Commission. They were rejected by the Congress. There 
was no support for these 14 demands of the Musalmans from any 
quarter whatsoever. Why did Mr. Gandhi become ready to grant them 
except with the object of buying the Musalmans so that with their help 
he could more effectively resist the demand of the other minorities and 
the untouchables ? 

In my view Mr. Gandhi was not engaged in making any bona-fide 
agreement. He was inducing the Musalmans to join in a conspiracy with 
him to resist the claim of the smaller minorities and the untouchables. 
It was not an agreement with the Musalmans. It was a plot against the 
Untouchables. It was worse, it was a stab in the back. 

This so-called agreement fell through because among other reasons 
it was impossible for the Mahomedans to agree to the exclusion of the 
Untouchables from the benefit of special representation. How could 
the Muslims agree to such a project ? They were fighting for special 
representation for Muslims. They were not only fighting for special 
representation, they were fighting for weightage in representation. 
They knew that the case for Muslims rested only on the ground 
that India was once ruled by the Musalmans, that they had political 
importance to maintain and as Hindus are likely to discriminate 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


323 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 323 

against Muslims in elections to the Legislatures, there may not be 
sufficient Muslims returned to the Legislature, that the Muslims will 
sink politically and that to prevent such a calamity they must be 
given special representation. As against this one ground in favour of 
Muslims there were a hundred grounds in favour of the claim by the 
Untouchables. With what face could the Musalmans oppose this demand 
of the Untouchables ? 

The Musalmans had not lost their balance or their sense of shame. 
They refused to be party to such a deal — a deal which they could not 
publicly defend. Mr. Gandhi still kept on pestering the Musalmans. 
When he could not induce them to accept the price he offered — namely 
the grant of fourteen points — because they felt that the world would not 
call it price but would call it the wages of sin, Mr. Gandhi sought to 
appeal to the religious scruples of the Musalmans. The day before the 
13th November 1 1931 when the minorities pact 2 was presented to the 
Minorities Sub-Committee of the Round Table Conference Mr. Gandhi 
took a copy of the Koran and went to the Ritz Hotel in Piccadilly where 
the Rt. Hon. H. H. Aga Khan was staying to meet the Muslim delegates 
who had assembled there. To Muslim delegates he asked — “Why are you 
dividing the Hindu Community which you are doing by recognizing the 
claim of the Untouchables for separate representation ? Does the Koran 
sanction such a deed ? Show me where it does ? If you cannot, will you 
not stop perpetrating such a crime upon your sister Community ?” I do not 
know how the Muslim delegates answered this question of Mr. Gandhi. 
It must have been a very difficult question for them to answer. Such a 
contingency could not have been present to the mind of the Holy Prophet 
and he could not have provided for it specifically. His followers knew 
that contingencies would arise for which he had given no directions and 
they had therefore asked him what they should do, and the Prophet had 
given them this general direction. He said to them, “in such a case see 
what the Kaffirs are doing and do just the opposite of it” 3 . Whether the 
Muslim delegates relied upon this to answer Mr. Gandhi is more than I 
can say. What I have stated is what I have heard and my source is the 
most authentic source. Here again Mr. Gandhi failed because the next 
day in the open Committee when Mr. Gandhi let loose his fury against 
the Untouchables, the Mahomedans were silent. 

What can one say of this conduct of Mr. Gandhi ? Mr. Bernard Shaw 
has said that the British do everything on principle. 

1 See Ambedkar, B. R., “What Congress and Gandhi have been done to the Untouchables”, 
p. 67.— Ed. 

2 Ibid. . Appendix III, pp. 307-11. 

3 See Koran. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


324 


324 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Similarly Mr. Gandhi says he does everything on the principle of 
morality and good faith. Can the acts of Mr. Gandhi be justified by 
tests of justice and good faith ? I wonder. Let me state a few facts. 
Before I left for London for the first Round Table Conference I had met 
Mr. Gandhi in Bombay. At that meeting I had informed Mr. Gandhi that 
at the Round Table Conference I would be asking for special representation 
for the Untouchables. Mr. Gandhi would not consent. But he also told 
me that he would not oppose. I felt that it was just a case of difference 
of opinion. At the second Round Table Conference I met Mr. Gandhi 
twice, once alone and second time along with the representatives of the 
smaller minorities. At the first meeting Mr. Gandhi was spinning and I 
was talking. I spoke for an hour during the whole of which he did not 
utter even a word. At the end he just said this much. 

‘I have now heard you. I will think over what you have said.’ At 
the second interview he again heard me and the representatives of the 
smaller minorities and he told me that he was not prepared to agree to 
the claim I was making on behalf of the Untouchables. Thereafter the 
Minorities Sub-Committee was convened on 28th September 1931. At 
the meeting of the Sub-Committee on 1st October 1931, the following 
motion was made by Mr. Gandhi : 

*“Prime Minister, after consultation with His Highness the Aga 
Khan and other Muslim friends last night, we came to the conclusion 
that the purpose for which we meet here would be better served if a 
week’s adjournment was asked for. I have not had the opportunity 
of consulting my other colleagues, but I have no doubt that they 
will also agree in the proposal I am making.” 

The proposal was seconded by the Aga Khan. I at once got up and 
objected to the motion and in support of my objection made the following 
statement* 1 : 

*“Dr. Ambedkar: I do not wish to create any difficulty in our 
making every possible attempt to arrive at some solution of the 
problem with which this Committee has to deal, and if a solution 
can be arrived at by the means suggested by Mahatma Gandhi, I, 
for one, will have no objection to that proposal. 

“But there is just this one difficulty with which I, as representing 
the Depressed Classes, am faced. I do not know what sort of 
committee Mahatma Gandhi proposes to appoint to consider this 
question during the period of adjournment, but I suppose that the 
Depressed Classes will be represented on this Committee. 

Mr. Gandhi : Without doubt. 

Following extracts up to p. 305 ending with words ‘informal meetings’ are reproduced 
from “What Congress and Gandhi have done to the Untouchables”, pp. 60-62. not typed 
in the MS . — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


325 


UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 325 

Dr. Ambedkar : Thank you. But I do not know whether in the 
position in which I am today it would be of any use for me to work 
on the proposed Committee. And for this reason. Mahatma Gandhi 
told us on the first day that he spoke in the Federal Structure 
Committee that as a representative of the Indian National Congress 
he was not prepared to give political recognition to any community 
other than the Muhammadans and the Sikhs. He was not prepared 
to recognize the Anglo-Indians, the Depressed Classes, and the 
Indian Christians. I do not think that I am doing any violence to 
etiquette by stating in this Committee that when I had the pleasure 
of meeting Mahatma Gandhi a week ago and discussing the question 
of the Depressed Classes with him, and when we, as members of 
the other minorities, had the chance of talking with him yesterday, 
in his office, he told us in quite plain terms that the attitude that 
he had taken in the Federal Structure Committee was a firm and 
well considered attitude. What I would like to say is that unless 
at the outset I know that the Depressed Classes are going to be 
recognised as a community entitled to political recognition in the 
future Constitution of India, I do not know whether it will serve 
any purpose for me to join the committee that is proposed by 
Mahatma Gandhi to be constituted to go into this matter. Unless, 
therefore, I have an assurance that this Committee will start with 
the assumption that all those communities which the Minorities 
Sub-Committee last year recommended as fit for recognition in the 
future constitution of India will be included, I do not know that 
I can wholeheartedly support the proposition for adjournment, or 
that I can whole-heartedly co-operate with the Committee that is 
going to be nominated. That is what I wish to be clear about. 

* * * 

“Dr. Ambedkar : I should like to make my position further 
clear. It seems that there has been a certain misunderstanding 
regarding what I said. It is not that I object to adjournment; it 
is not that I object to serving on any Committee that might be 
appointed to consider the question. What I would like to know 
before I enter upon this Committee, if they give me the privilege 
of serving on it, is : What is the thing that this Committee is 
going to consider ? Is it only going to consider the question of the 
Muhammadans vis-a-vis the Hindus ? Is it going to consider the 
question of the Muhammadans vis-a-vis the Sikhs in the Punjab ? 

Or is it going to consider the question of the Christians, the 
Anglo-Indians and the Depressed Classes ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


326 


326 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“If we understand perfectly well before we start that this 
committee will not merely concern itself with the question of the 
Hindus and the Muhammadans, of the Hindus and the Sikhs, but 
will also take upon itself the responsibility of considering the case of 
the Depressed Classes, the Anglo-Indians and the Christians, I am 
perfectly willing to allow this adjournment resolution to be passed 
without any objection. But I do want to say this, that if I am to be 
left out in the cold and if this interval is going to be utilised for the 
purposes of solving the Hindu-Muslim question, I would press that 
the Minorities Committee should itself grapple with the question 
and consider it, rather than allow the question to be dealt with by 
some other informal Committee for arriving at a solution of the 
communal question in respect of some minorities only.” 

The Prime Minister as Chairman of the Committee called upon 
Mr. Gandhi to explain his position and Mr. Gandhi made the following 
statement in reply 1 : 

“Prime Minister and friends, I see that there is some kind of 
misunderstanding with reference to the scope of the work that some 
of us have set before ourselves. I fear that Dr. Ambedkar, Colonel 
Gidney and other friends are unnecessarily nervous about what is 
going to happen. Who am I to deny political status to any single 
interest or class or even individual in India ? As a representative 
of the Congress I should be unworthy of the trust that has been 
reposed in me by the Congress if I were guilty of sacrificing a single 
national interest. I have undoubtedly given expression to my own 
views on these points. I must confess that I hold to those views 
also. But there are ways and ways of guaranteeing protection to 
every single interest. It will be for those of us who will be putting 
our heads together to try to evolve a scheme. Nobody would be 
hampered in pressing his own views on the members of this very 
informal conference or meeting. 

“I do not think, therefore, that anybody need be afraid as to 
being able to express his opinion or carrying his opinion also. Mine 
will be there equal to that of every one of us; it will carry no greater 
weight; I have no authority behind me to carry my opinion against 
the opinion of anybody. I have simply given expression to my views 
in the national interest, and I shall give expression to these views 
whenever they are opportune. It will be for you, it is for you to 
reject or accept these opinions. Therefore please disburse your 
minds, to everyone of us, of the idea that there is going to be any 


See “What Congress and Gandhi have done to the Untouchables”, p. 62. 
(both the above extracts are not mentioned in the MS.). — Ed. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 

UNDER THE PROVIDENCE OF MR. GANDHI 

steam-rolling in the Conference and the informal meetings that I 
have adumbrated. But if you think that this is one way of coming 
closer together than by sitting stiffly at this table, you will not 
carry this adjournment motion but give your whole-hearted co- 
operation to the proposal that I have made in connection with 
these informal meetings.” 

* * * 

I then withdrew my objection. 

Now here is a definite word given by Mr. Gandhi in open 
Conference — namely that if all others agreed to recognize the claim 
of the Untouchables he would not object. And after having given this 
word Mr. Gandhi went about inducing the Musalmans not to recognize 
the claim of the Untouchables and to bribe them to resile and take 
back their plighted word!! Is this good faith or is this treachery ? If 
this is not treachery I wonder what else could be called treachery. 

I was pilloried because I signed what is called the Minorities 
Pact. I was depicted as a traitor. I have never been ashamed of my 
signature to the pact. I only pity the ignorance of my critics. They 
forget that the minorities could have taken the same attitude that 
Ulster took towards Irish Home Rule. Redmond was prepared to offer 
any safeguard to Ulstermen. The Ulstermen’s reply was, “Damn your 
safeguards we don’t wish to be ruled by you”. The Hindus ought to 
thank the minorities that they did not take any such attitude. All 
the Pact contained were safeguards and nothing more. Instead of 
thanking them Mr. Gandhi poured his vials of wrath upon the pact 
and its authors. He said : 

“Coming to this document 1 , I accept the thanks that have been 
given to me by Sir Hubert Carr. Had it not been for the remarks 
that I made when I shouldered that burden, and had it not been for 
my utter failure to bring about a solution, Sir Hubert Carr rightly 
says he would not have found the very admirable solution that he 
has been able, in common with the other minorities, to present to 
this Committee for consideration and finally for the consideration 
and approval of His Majesty’s Government.” 

“I will not deprive Sir Hubert Carr and his associates of the 
feeling of satisfaction that evidently actuates them, but, in my 
opinion, what they have done is to sit by the carcass, and they 
have performed the laudable feat of dissecting that carcass.” 


327 

327 


Reference is to the Minorities Pact. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


328 


328 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Had Mr. Gandhi any right to be indignant ? Had he any right to feel 
morally offended ? Was he entitled to throw stones at the Minorities ? 
Mr. Gandhi forgot that he was as much a sinner as the Minorities and 
worse he was a sinner without a sense of justice. For if the Minorities 
were dividing the carcass what was Mr. Gandhi himself doing ? He 
too was busy in dividing the carcass. The only difference between 
Mr. Gandhi and the Minorities was this — Mr. Gandhi wanted that the 
carcass should be divided among three only, Hindus, Musalmans and 
Sikhs. The Minorities wanted that others also should be given a share, 
and which of these two can claim to have justice on its side, Mr. Gandhi 
who wanted that the division of the carcass should be to strong sturdy 
well-nourished wolves or the minorities who pressed that the lean and 
hungry lambs should also be given a morsel ? Surely in this controversy 
justice was not on the side of Mr. Gandhi. 

Mr. Gandhi was the man who claimed to be the Champion of the 
Untouchables better than those who belonged to the Untouchables 
themselves. Claiming to be their champion he refused without any regard 
to morality, justice and necessity, their claim to representation which 
could be their only way to protection against social tyranny and social 
oppression while he was prepared to give to the Musalmans, the Hindus 
and the Sikhs a goodly share of political power. When others far better 
placed were claiming for power, Mr. Gandhi wanted the Untouchables 
to live under his providence and that of the Congress without any 
means of protection knowing full well that their lives were exposed to 
danger and humiliation every moment and when he came to know that 
the Untouchables were seeking outside aid in support of their claim 
Mr. Gandhi resorted to a terrible act of treachery. Were the Untouchables 
unjustified in presenting to the world their charge sheet against 
Mr. Gandhi when he arrived in Bombay from the Round Table Conference ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


329 


Chapter 25 

GANDHI AND HIS FAST 


I. Poona Pact. II. Harijan Sevak Sangh. III. Temples and 
Untouchables. IV. The Gandhian Way. 

I 

The Communal question was the rock on which the Indian Round 
Table Conference suffered a shipwreck. The Conference broke up 
as there could be no agreement between the majority and minority 
communities. The minorities in India insisted that their position under 
Swaraj should be safeguarded by allowing them special representation 
in the Legislatures. Mr. Gandhi as representative of the Congress was 
not prepared to recognize such a claim except in the case of the Muslims 
and the Sikhs. Even in the case of the Muslims and Sikhs, no agreement 
was reached either on the question of the number of seats or the nature 
of the electorates. 

There was a complete deadlock. As there was no possibility of an 
agreement, the hope lay in arbitration. On this everybody was agreed 
except myself and it was left to Mr. Ramsay Macdonald, the Prime 
Minister to decide upon the issue. 

When at the first Round Table Conference, the Indian delegates 
did not agree upon a solution of the Communal question, followers of 
Mr. Gandhi said that nothing better could be expected from them. It 
was said that they were unrepresentative and responsible to nobody 
and were deliberately creating disunity by playing into the hands of 
the British whose tools and nominees they were. The world was told to 
await the arrival of Mr. Gandhi, whose statesmanship it was promised 
would be quite adequate to settle the dispute. It was therefore a matter 
of great humiliation for the friends of Mr. Gandhi that he should have 
acknowledged his bankruptcy and joined in the request to the Prime 
Minister to arbitrate. 

But if the Conference failed the fault is entirely of Mr. Gandhi. A 
more ignorant and more tactless representative could not have been 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


330 


330 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

sent to a Conference which was convened to forge a constitution 
which was to reconcile the diverse interests of India. Mr. Gandhi was 
thoroughly ignorant of Constitutional Law or Finance. He does not 
believe in intellectual equipment. Indeed he has a supreme contempt 
for it and his contributions to the solutions of the many difficulties 
is therefore nil. He was tactless because he annoyed almost all the 
delegates by constantly telling them that they were nonentities and 
he was the only man who counted and who could deliver the goods. 
At the first Round Table Conference the delegates did not agree upon 
a solution of the communal problem. But it is equally true that they 
were very near agreeing to it and when they departed they had not 
given up hope of agreeing. But at the end of the second Round Table 
Conference, so much bad blood was created by Mr. Gandhi that there 
was no chance of reconciliation left and there was no way except 
arbitration. 

The Prime Minister’s decision on the communal question was 
announced on 17th August 1932. The terms of the decision in so far 
as they related to the Untouchables were as follows P 

Communal Decision by His Majesty’s Government 1932 

In the statement made by the Prime Minister on 1st December 
last on behalf of His Majesty’s Government at the close of the second 
session of the Round Table Conference, which was immediately 
afterwards endorsed by both Houses of Parliament, it was made 
plain that if the communities in India were unable to reach a 
settlement acceptable to all parties on the communal questions 
which the Conference had failed to solve, His Majesty’s Government 
were determined that India’s constitutional advance should not 
on that account be frustrated, and that they would remove this 
obstacle by divising and applying themselves a provisional scheme. 

2. On the 19th March last His Majesty’s Government, having 
been informed that the continued failure of the communities to 
reach agreement was blocking the progress of the plans for the 
framing of a new Constitution, stated that they were engaged upon 
a careful re-examination of the difficult and controversial question 


The following text of the Communal Award is not typed in the MS. This is reproduced 
from ‘What Congress and Gandhi Have Done to the Untouchables’ by the author. ( Thacker 
and Co. Ltd. . 1st Ed. June 1945, pp. 80-82). — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


331 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 331 

which arise. They are now satisfied that without a decision of at 
least some aspects of the problems connected with the position of 
minorities under the new Constitution, no further progress can be 
made with the framing of the Constitution. 

3. His Majesty’s Government have accordingly decided that they 
will include provisions to give effect to the scheme set out below in 
the proposals relating to the Indian Constitution to be laid in due 
course before Parliament. The scope of this scheme is purposely 
confined to the arrangements to be made for the representation 
of the British Indian communities in the Provincial Legislatures, 
consideration of representation in the Legislature at the Centre being 
deferred for the reason given in paragraph 20 below. The decision to 
limit the scope of the scheme implies no failure to realize that the 
framing of the Constitution will necessitate the decision of a number 
of other problems of great importance to minorities, but has been 
taken in the hope that once a pronouncement has been made upon 
the basic questions of method and proportions of representation the 
communities themselves may find it possible to arrive at modus 
vivendi on other communal problems, which have not received the 
examination they require. 

4. His Majesty’s Government wish it to be most clearly understood 
that they themselves can be no parties to any negotiations which may 
be initiated with a view to the revision of their decision, and will 
not be prepared to give consideration to any representation aimed 
at securing the modification of it which is not supported by all the 
parties affected. But they are most desirous to close no door to an 
agreed settlement should such happily be forthcoming. If, therefore, 
before a new Government of India Act has passed into law, they are 
satisfied that the communities who are concerned are mutually agreed 
upon a practicable alternative scheme, either in respect of any one 
or more of the Governors’ Provinces or in respect of the whole of the 
British India, they will be prepared to recommend to Parliament that 
that alternative should be substituted for the provisions now outlined. 

^ * * * * * 

g k k k k k 

'J k k k k k 

O k k k k k 


9. Members of the “depressed classes” qualified to vote will vote 
in a general constituency. In view of the fact that for a considerable 
period these classes would be unlikely, by this means alone, to 
secure any adequate representation in the Legislature, a number of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


332 


332 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

special seats will be assigned to them as shown in the table. 
These seats will be filled by election from special constituencies 
in which only members of the “depressed classes” electorally 
qualified will be entitled to vote. Any person voting in such a 
special constituency will, as stated above, be also entitled to vote 
in a general costituency. It is intended that these constituencies 
should be formed in selected areas where the depressed classes 
are most numerous, and that, except in Madras, they should not 
cover the whole area of the Province. 

In Bengal it seems possible that in some general constituencies 
a majority of the voters will belong to the Depressed Classes. 
Accordingly, pending further investigation no number has been 
fixed for the members to be returned from the special Depressed 
Class constituencies in that Province. It is intended to secure 
that the Depressed Classes should obtain not less than 10 seats 
in the Bengal Legislature. 

The precise definition in each Province of those who (if 
electorally qualified) will be entitled to vote in the special Depressed 
Class constituencies has not yet been finally determined. It will 
be based as a rule on the general principles advocated in the 
Franchise Committee’s Report. Modification may, however, be 
found necessary in some Provinces in Northern India where the 
application of the general criteria of untouchability might result in 
a definition unsuitable in some respects to the special conditions 
of the Province. 

His Majesty’s Government do not consider that these special 
Depressed Classes constituencies will be required for more than 
limited time. They intend that the Constitution shall provide 
that they shall come to an end after 20 years if they have not 
previously been abolished under the general powers of electoral 
revision referred to in paragraph 6. 

So far as the other minority communities were concerned the 
Communal Award was accepted and the sore of disunity and discord 
was closed. But so far as the Untouchables were concerned it 
remained open. Mr. Gandhi would not allow it to be healed. On his 
return to India from the Round Table Conference Mr. Gandhi was 
put behind the bars by the British Government. But though in the 
Yeravada gaol Mr. Gandhi had not forgotten that he had to prevent 
the Untouchables from getting their claim to special representation 
recognized by the British Government. He feared that the British 
Government might grant them this right notwithstanding the threat he 
had held out while at the Round Table Conference to resist it with his 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


333 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 333 

own life. Consequently he took the earliest opportunity to be in 
communication with the very British Government which had incarcerated 
him. 

On the 11th March 1932 Mr. Gandhi addressed the following letter 
to Sir Samuel Hoare, the then Secretary of State for India : 

Dear Sir Samuel, 

You will perhaps recollect that at the end of my speech at the 
Round Table Conference when the minorities’ claim was presented, 
I had said that I should resist with my life the grant of separate 
electorates to the Depressed Classes. This was not said in the heat 
of the moment nor by way of rhetoric. It was meant to be a serious 
statement. In pursuance of that statement I had hoped on my return 
to India to mobilize public opinion against separate electorate, at any 
rate for the Depressed Classes. But it was not to be. 

From the newspapers I am permitted to read, I observe that 
any moment His Majesty’s Government may declare their decision. 
At first I had thought, if the decision was found to create separate 
electorates for the Depressed Classes, I should take such steps as I 
might then consider necessary to give effect to my vow. But I feel 
it would be unfair to the British Government for me to act without 
giving previous notice. Naturally, they could not attach the significance 
I give to my statement. 


Separate Electorates harmful 

I need hardly reiterate all the objections I have to the creation of 
separate electorates for the Depressed Classes. I feel as if I was one 
of them. Their case stands on a wholly different footing from that 
of others. I am not against their representation in the legislatures. 
I should favour every one of their adults, male and female, being 
registered as voters irrespective of education or property qualification, 
even though the franchise test may be stricter for others. But I hold 
that separate electorates is harmful for them and for Hinduism, 
whatever it may be from the purely political standpoint. To appreciate 
the harm that separate electorates would do them one has to know 
how they are distributed amongst the so-called Caste Hindus and how 
dependent they are on the latter. So far as Hinduism is concerned, 
separate electorate would simply vivisect and disrupt it. 

For me the question of these classes is predominantly moral and 
religious. The political aspect, important though it is, dwindles into 
significance compared to the moral and religious issue. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


334 


334 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

You will have to appreciate my feelings in this matter by 
remembering that I have been interested in the condition of these 
classes from my boyhood and have more than once staked my all 
for their sake. I say this not to pride myself in any way. For, I feel 
that no penance that the Hindus may do can in any way compensate 
for the calculated degradation to which they have consigned the 
Depressed Classes for centuries. 


“Shall fast unto Death” 

But I know that separate electorate is neither a penance nor any 
remedy for the crushing degradation they have groaned under. I, 
therefore, respectfully inform His Majesty’s Government that in the 
event of their decision creating separate electorate for the Depressed 
Classes, I must fast unto death. 

I am painfully conscious of the fact that such a step whilst I 
am a prisoner, must cause grave embarrassment to His Majesty’s 
Government, and that it will be regarded by many as highly improper 
on the part of one holding my position to introduce into the political 
field methods which they would describe as hysterical if not much 
worse. All I can urge in defence is that for me the contemplated step 
is not a method, it is part of my being. It is the call of conscience 
which I dare not disobey, even though it may cost whatever reputation 
for sanity I may possess. So far as I can see now, my discharge 
from imprisonment would not make the duty of fasting any the less 
imperative. I am hoping, however, all my fears are wholly unjustified 
and the British Government have no intention whatever of creating 
separate electorate for the Depressed Classes. 


The following reply was sent to Mr. Gandhi by the Secretary of State : 

India Office, Whitehall, 
April 13, 1932. 

Dear Mr. Gandhi, 

I write this in answer to your letter of 11th March, and I say at 
once I realize fully the strength of your feeling upon the question of 
separate electorates for the Depressed Classes. I can only say that 
we intend to give any decision that may be necessary solely and 
only upon the merits of the case. As you are aware, Lord Lothian’s 
Committee has not yet completed its tour and it must be some 
weeks before we can receive any conclusions at which it may have 
arrived. When we receive that report we shall have to give most 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


335 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 335 

careful consideration to its recommendations, and we shall not give 
a decision until we have taken into account, in addition to the view 
expressed by the Committee, the views that you and those who think 
with you have so forcibly expressed. I feel sure if you were in our 
position you would be taking exactly the same action we intend to 
take. You would await the Committee’s report, you would then give 
it your fullest consideration, and before arriving at a final decision 
you would take into account the views that have been expressed on 
both sides of the controversy. More than this I cannot say. Indeed I 
do not imagine you would expect me to say more. 


After giving this warning Mr. Gandhi slept over the matter thinking 
that a repetition of his threat to fast unto death was sufficient to paralyse 
the British Government and prevent them from accepting the claim of 
the untouchables for special representation. When on the 17th August 
1932 the terms of the Communal Award were announced Mr. Gandhi 
found that his threat had failed to have any effect. He first tried to get 
the terms of the Communal Award revised. Accordingly he addressed 
the following letter to the Prime Minister : 

Yervada Central Prison, 
August 18, 1932. 

Dear friend, 

There can be no doubt that Sir Samuel Hoare has showed you 
and the Cabinet my letter to him of 11th March on the question of 
the representation of the Depressed Classes. That letter should be 
treated as part of this letter and be read together with this. 

Decision to fast 

I have read the British Government’s decision on the representation 
of Minorities and have slept over it. In pursuance of my letter to 
Sir Samuel Hoare and my declaration at the meeting of the Minorities 
Committee of the Round Table Conference on 13th November, 1931, 
at St. James’ Palace, I have to resist your decision with my life. The 
only way I can do so is by declaring a perpetual fast unto death from 
food of any kind save water with or without salt and soda. This fast 
will cease if during its progress the British Government, of its own 
motion or under pressure of public opinion, revise their decision and 
withdraw their scheme of communal electorates for the Depressed 
Classes, whose representatives should be elected by the general 
electorate under the common franchise no matter how wide it is. 

The proposed fast will come into operation in the ordinary 
course from the noon of 20th September next, unless the said 
decision is meanwhile revised in the manner suggested above. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


336 


336 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I am asking the authorities here to cable the text of this letter 
to you so as to give you ample notice. But in any case, I am leaving 
sufficient time for this letter to reach you in time by the slowest route. 

I also ask that this letter and my letter to Sir Samuel Hoare 
already referred to be published at the earliest possible moment. 
On my part, I have scrupulously observed the rule of the jail and 
have communicated my desire or the contents of the two letters to 
no one, save my two companions, Sardar Vallabhabhai Patel and Mr. 
Mahadev Desai. But I want, if you make it possible, public opinion to 
be affected by my letters. Hence my request for their early publication. 


Not to compass Release 


I regret the decision I have taken. But as a man of religion that 
I hold myself to be, I have no other course left open to me. As I 
have said in my letter to Sir Samuel Hoare, even if His Majesty’s 
Government decided to release me in order to save themselves 
from embarrassment, my fast will have to continue. For, I cannot 
now hope to resist the decision by any other means; And I have no 
desire whatsoever to compass my release by any means other than 
honourable. 


It may be that my judgment is warped and that I am wholly in 
error in regarding separate electorates for the Depressed Classes as 
harmful to them or to Hinduism. If so, I am not likely to be in the 
right with reference to other parts of my philosophy of life. In that 
case my death by fasting will be at once a penance for my error and 
a lifting of a weight from off these numberless men and women who 
have childlike faith in my wisdom. Whereas if my judgment is right, 
as I have little doubt it is, the contemplated step is but due to the 
fulfilment of the scheme of life which I have tried for more than a 
quarter of a century, apparently not without considerable success. 

I remain, 

Your faithful friend, 
M. K. Gandhi. 


The Prime Minister replied as under : 

10, Downing Street, 
September 8th, 1932 

Dear Mr. Gandhi, 

I have received your letter with much surprise and, let me add, 
with very sincere regret. Moreover, I cannot help thinking that you 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


337 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 337 

have written it under a misunderstanding as to what the decision of 
His Majesty’s Government as regards the Depressed Classes really 
implies. We have always understood you were irrevocably opposed to 
the permanent segregation of the Depressed Classes from the Hindu 
community. You made your position very clear on the Minorities 
Committee of the Round Table Conference and you expressed it again 
in the letter you wrote to Sir Samuel Hoare on 11th March. We also 
knew your view was shared by the great body of Hindu opinion, and we, 
therefore, took it into most careful account when we were considering 
the question of representation of the Depressed Classes. 


Government Decision Explained 

Whilst, in view of the numerous appeals we have received from 
Depressed Class organisations and the generally admitted social 
disabilities under which they labour and which you have often recognized, 
we felt it our duty to safeguard what we believed to be the right of 
the Depressed Classes to a fair proportion of representation in the 
legislatures, we were equally careful to do nothing that would split off 
their community from the Hindu world. You yourself stated in your 
letter of March 11, that you were not against their representation in 
the legislatures. 

Under the Government scheme the Depressed Classes will remain 
part of the Hindu community and will vote with the Hindu electorate 
on an equal footing, but for the first twenty years, while still remaining 
electorally part of the Hindu community, they will receive through a 
limited number of special constituencies, means of safeguarding their 
rights and interests that, we are convinced, is necessary under present 
conditions. 

Where these constituencies are created, members of the Depressed 
Classes will not be deprived of their votes in the general Hindu 
constituencies, but will have two votes in order that their membership 
of the Hindu community should remain unimpaired. 

We have deliberately decided against the creation of what you describe 
as a communal electorate for the Depressed Classes and included all 
Depressed Class voters in the general or Hindu constituencies so that the 
higher caste candidates should have to solicit their votes or Depressed 
Class candidates should have to solicit the votes of the higher castes at 
elections. Thus in every way was the unity of Hindu society preserved. 


Safeguard Temporary 

We felt, however, that during the early period of responsible 
government when power in the Provinces would pass to whoever 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


338 


338 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

possessed a majority in the legislatures, it was essential that the 
Depressed Classes, whom you have yourself described in your letter to 
Sir Samuel Hoare as having consigned by Caste Hindus to calculated 
degradation for centuries, should return a certain number of members 
of their own choosing to legislatures of seven of the nine provinces 
to voice their grievances and their ideals and prevent decisions going 
against them without the legislature and the Government listening 
to their case — in a word, to place them in a position to speak for 
themselves which every fair-minded person must agree to be necessary. 
We did not consider the method of electing special representatives 
by reservation of seats in the existing conditions, under any system 
of franchise which is practicable, members who could genuinely 
represent them and be responsible for them, because in practically 
all cases, such members would be elected by a majority consisting of 
higher caste Hindus. 

The special advantage initially given under our scheme to 
the Depressed Classes by means of a limited number of special 
constituencies in addition to their normal electoral rights in the general 
Hindu constituencies is wholly different in conception and effect from 
the method of representation adopted for a minority such as the 
Moslems by means of separate communal electorates. For example, 
a Moslem cannot vote or be a candidate in a general constituency, 
whereas any electorally qualified member of the Depressed Classes 
can vote in and stand for the general constituency. 


Reservation Minimum 

The number of territorial seats allotted to Moslems is naturally 
conditioned by the fact that it is impossible for them to gain any further 
territorial seats and in most provinces they enjoy weightage in excess 
of their population ratio; the number of special seats to be filled from 
special Depressed Classes constituencies will be seen to be small and 
has been fixed not to provide a quota numerically appropriate for the 
total representation of the whole of the Depressed Class population, but 
solely to secure a minimum number of spokesmen for the Depressed 
Classes in the legislature who are chosen exclusively by the Depressed 
Classes. The proportion of their special seats is everywhere much 
below the population percentage of the Depressed Classes. 

As I understand your attitude, you propose to adopt the extreme 
course of starving yourself to death not in order to secure that the 
Depressed Classes should have joint electorates with other Hindus, 
because that it already provided, nor to maintain the unity of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


339 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 339 

Hindus, which is also provided, but solely to prevent the Depressed 
Classes, who admittedly suffer from terrible disabilities today, from 
being able to secure a limited number of representatives of their own 
choosing to speak on their behalf in the legislatures which will have 
a dominating influence over their future. 

In the light of these very fair and cautious proposals, I am quite 
unable to understand the reason of the decision you have taken and 
can only think you have made it under a misapprehension of the 
actual facts. 


Government Decision Stands 

In response to a very general request from Indians after they 
had failed to produce a settlement themselves the Government much 
against its will, undertook to give a decision on the minorities question. 
They have now given it, and they cannot be expected to alter it except 
on the conditions they have stated. I am afraid, therefore, that my 
answer to you must be that the Government’s decision stands and that 
only agreement of the communities themselves can substitute other 
electoral arrangements for those that Government have devised in a 
sincere endeavour to weigh the conflicting claims on their just merits. 

You ask that this correspondence, including your letter to Sir 
Samuel Hoare of March 11th, should be published. As it would seem 
to me unfair if your present internment were to deprive you of the 
opportunity of explaining to the public the reason why you intend to 
fast, I readily accede to the request if on reconsideration you repeat 
it. Let me, however, once again urge you to consider the actual details 
of Government’s decision and ask yourself seriously the question 
whether it really justifies you in taking the action you contemplate. 

I am, 

Yours very sincerely, 

J. Ramsay MacDonald. 

Finding that the Prime Minister would not yield he sent him the 
following letter informing him that he was determined to carry out his 
threat of fast unto death : 

Yeravada Central Prison, 
September 9th, 1932. 

Dear friend, 

I have to thank you for your frank and full letter telegraphed 
and received this day. I am sorry, however, that you put upon the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


340 


340 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

contemplated step an interpretation that never crossed my mind. I 
have claimed to speak on behalf of the very class, to sacrifice whose 
interests you impute to me a desire to fast myself to death. I had 
hoped that the extreme step itself would effectively prevent any 
such selfish interpretation without arguing, I affirm that for me 
this matter is one of pure religion. The mere fact of the Depressed 
Classes having double votes does not protect them or Hindu society 
in general from being disrupted. In the establishment of separate 
electorate at all for the Depressed Classes I sense the injection of 
poison that is calculated to destroy Hinduism and do no good whatever 
to the Depressed Classes. You will please permit me to say that no 
matter how sympathetic you may be, you cannot come to a correct 
decision on a matter of such vital and religious importance to the 
parties concerned. 

I should not be against even over-representation of the Depressed 
Classes. What I am against is their statutory separation even in a 
limited form, from the Hindu fold, so long as they choose to belong 
to it. Do you realize that if your decision stands and the constitution 
comes into being, you arrest the marvellous growth of the work of 
Hindu reformers who have dedicated themselves to the uplift of their 
suppressed brethren in every walk of life ? 


Decision Unchanged 

I have, therefore, been compelled reluctantly to adhere to the 
decision conveyed to you. 

As your letter may give rise to a misunderstanding, I wish to 
state that the fact of my having isolated for special treatment the 
Depressed Classes question from other parts of your decision does not 
in any way mean that I approve of or am reconciled to other parts 
of the decision. In my opinion, many other parts are open to very 
grave objection. Only I do not consider them to be any warrant for 
calling from me such self immolation as my conscience has prompted 
me to, in the matter of the Depressed Classes. 

I remain, 

Your faithful friend, 
M. K. Gandhi. 

Accordingly on the 20th September 1932 Mr. Gandhi commenced his 
“fast unto death” as a protest against the grant of separate electorates 
to the Untouchables. 

The story of this fast has been told by Mr. Pyarelal in a volume 
which bears the picturesque and flamboyant title of “The Epic 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


341 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 341 

Fast”. In the pages of this lours Boswelliana the curious will find all he 
wants to know about the happenings in India during these mad days 
and I need say nothing about it here. Suffice it to say that although 
Mr. Gandhi went on fast unto death he did not want to die. He very 
much wanted to live. 

The fast therefore created a problem and that problem was how to 
save Mr. Gandhi’s life. The only way to save his life was to alter the 
Communal Award so as not to hurt Mr. Gandhi’s conscience. The Prime 
Minister had made it quite clear that the British Cabinet would not 
withdraw it or alter it of its own but that they were ready to substitute 
for it a formula that may be agreed upon by the Caste Hindus and the 
Untouchables. As I had the privilege of representing the Untouchables 
at the Round Table Conference it was assumed that the assent of the 
Untouchables would not be valid unless I was a party to it. At the moment 
my position as the representative of the Untouchables of India was not 
only not questioned but was accepted as a fact. All eyes naturally turned 
to me as the man or rather as the villain of the piece. Mr. Gandhi’s life 
as he himself said was in my hands. 

It is no exaggeration to say that no man was placed in a greater and 
graver dilemma than I was then. It was a baffling situation. I had to 
make a choice between two different alternatives. There was before me 
the duty which I owed as a part of common humanity to save Gandhi 
from sure death. There was before me the problem of saving for the 
Untouchables the political rights which the Prime Minister had given 
them. I responded to the call of humanity and saved the life of Mr. Gandhi 
by agreeing to alter the Communal Award in a manner satisfactory to 
Mr. Gandhi. This agreement is known as the Poona Pact. 

The terms of the Poona Pact were as under : 

1. There shall be seats reserved for the Depressed Classes out of 


general electorates. Seats in Provincial Legislatures shall be as 
follows : 

Madras 

30 

Bombay with Sind 

15 

Punjab 

8 

Bihar and Orissa 

18 

Central Provinces 

20 

Assam 

7 

Bengal 

30 

United Provinces 

20 

Total 

148 


1 This number of 148 seats was raised to 151 in making adjustments on seats for 
Bihar and Orissa. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


342 


342 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

These figures are based on the total strength of the Provincial 
Councils announced in the Prime Minister’s decision. 

2. Election to these seats shall be by joint electorates subject, however, 
to the following procedure : 

All members of the Depressed Classes registered in the general 
electoral roll of a constituency, will form an electoral college which 
will elect a panel of four candidates belonging to the Depressed 
Classes, for each of such reserved seats by the method of single 
vote and four persons getting the highest number of votes in 
such primary election, shall be the candidates for election by the 
general electorates. 

3. Representation of the Depressed Classes in the Central Legislature 
shall likewise be on the principle of joint electorates and reserved 
seats by the method of primary election in the manner provided 
for in clause 2 above for their representation in Provincial 
Legislatures. 

4. In the Central Legislature 18 per cent of the seats allotted to the 
general electorate for British India in the said legislature shall 
be reserved for the Depressed Classes. 

5. The system of primary election to panel of candidates for election 
to the Central and Provincial Legislatures, as hereinbefore 
mentioned, shall come to an end after the first ten years unless 
terminated sooner by mutual agreement under the provision of 
Clause 6 below. 

6. The system of representation of the Depressed Classes by reserved 
seats in the Provincial and Central Legislatures as provided for 
in clauses 1 and 4 shall continue until determined by mutual 
agreement between the communities concerned in this settlement. 

7. The franchise for the Central and Provincial Legislature for the 
Depressed Classes shall be as indicated in the Lothian Committee 
Report. 

8. There shall be no disabilities attaching to anyone on the ground 
of his being a member of the Depressed Classes in regard to any 
elections to local bodies or appointment to public service. 

Every endeavour shall be made to secure a fair representation of 
the Depressed Classes in these respects subject to such educational 
qualifications as may be laid down for appointment to public 
services. 

9. In every province out of the educational grant an adequate sum 
shall be earmarked for providing educational facilities to members 
of the Depressed Classes. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


343 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 343 

The terms of the Pact were accepted by Mr. Gandhi and given effect 
to by Government by embodying them in the Government of India Act. 

This fast unto death was a great gamble on the part of Mr. Gandhi. 
He perhaps felt that the mere threat to fast unto death would make me 
and other Depressed Classes who were with me just shiver and yield. 
But he soon found that he was mistaken and that the Untouchables 
were equally determined to fight to the last for their rights. No one 
except his own followers was convinced that Mr. Gandhi’s fast had any 
moral basis and if Gandhi got a second lease of life, he owes it entirely 
to the generosity and goodwill shown towards him by the Untouchables. 

Question however is what advantage the Untouchables have got by 
entering into the Poona Pact. To understand this one must examine the 
results of the elections to the Legislatures. The Government of India Act 
came into operation on 1st April 1937. In February 1937 the elections 
to the new legislatures as defined in the Act took place. So far as the 
Untouchables are concerned the elections which took place in February 
1937 were elections in accordance with the Poona Pact. The following is 
the analysis of the results of that election to the seats reserved for the 
Untouchables in the different Provincial Assemblies. 


TABLE 1 


Province 



Total Seats 
Reserved for 
the 

Untouchables 

Total Seats 
Captured 
by 
the 

Congress 

United Provinces 



20 

16 

Madras 



30 

26 

Bengal 



30 

6 

Central Provinces 



20 

7 

Bombay 



15 

4 

Bihar 



15 

11 

Punjab 



8 

Nil 

Assam 



7 

4 

Orissa 



6 

4 


Total 


151 

78 


1 This Table is reprinted from Dr. Ambedkar’s ‘What Congress and Gandhi have done 
to the Untouchables’ at page 94. This table was not typed in the M.S. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


344 


344 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

This analysis reveals certain facts which make one ask whether 
the Untouchables have got anything of any value by entering into the 
Poona Pact and saving the life of Mr. Gandhi and whether the Poona 
Pact has not made the Untouchables the Bondsmen of the Caste Hindus. 

This analysis shows that a large majority of them have been elected 
as Congressmen. It is my firm conviction that for the Untouchables to 
merge in the Congress or for the matter of that in any large political 
party cannot but be fatal for them. 

The Untouchables need a movement if they are to remain conscious of 
their wrongs and if the spirit of revolt is kept alive amongst them. They 
need a movement because the Caste Hindus have to be told that what is 
tragedy of the Untouchables is their crime. The Congress may not be a 
red-blooded Hindu body so far as the Musalmans are concerned. But it 
is certainly a full-blooded and blue-blooded Hindu body inasmuch as it 
consists of Caste Hindus. A movement of the Untouchables must mean 
an open war upon the Caste Hindus. A movement of the Untouchables 
within the Congress is quite impossible. It must mean an inter necine 
within the party. The Congress for its own safety cannot allow it. 

The Congress has strictly forbidden the Untouchables who have 
joined the Congress to carry on any independent movement of the 
Untouchables not approved of by the High Command. The result is that 
in those Provinces where the Untouchables have joined the Congress 
the movement of the Untouchables as such is dead. 

The Untouchables must retain their right to freedom of speech 
and freedom of action on the floor of the Legislature if they are to 
ventilate their grievances and obtain redress of their wrongs by political 
action. But this freedom of speech and action has been lost by the 
representatives of the Untouchables who have joined the Congress. 
They cannot vote as they like, they cannot speak what they think. 
They cannot ask a question, they cannot move a resolution and they 
cannot bring in a Bill. They are completely under the control of the 
Congress Party Executive. They have only such freedom as the Congress 
Executive may choose to allow them. The result is that though the 
tale of woes of the Untouchables is ever-increasing, the untouchable 
members of the Legislature are unable even to ask a question about 
them. So pitiable has their condition become that the Congress Party 
sometimes requires them to vote against a measure that may in the 
opinion of the Untouchable members of the Legislature be beneficial 
to the Untouchables. A recent instance of this occurred in Madras. 
Rao Bahadur Raja a member of the Madras Legislature brought in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


345 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 345 

a Bill to secure the entry of the Untouchables into Hindu Temples in 
the Madras Presidency. The Congress Government had promised to 
support it at first. Subsequently the Congress Government in Madras 
changed its opinion and opposed the measure. It was a dilemma for 
the Untouchable members of the Madras Legislature. But they had 
no choice. The whip was applied and they in a body voted against 
the measure. The representatives of the Untouchables were supposed 
to be the watch-dogs of the Untouchables. But by reason of having 
joined the Congress they are muzzled dogs. Far from biting they are 
not even able to bark. This loss of freedom of speech and action by 
these Untouchable members is entirely due to their having joined the 
Congress and subjected themselves to the discipline of the Congress. 

The third disadvantage arising from the Untouchables joining the 
Congress lies in their being unable to secure any real benefit to the 
Untouchables. This is due to two reasons. First of all the Congress is not 
a radical party. The Congress has the reputation of being a revolutionary 
organization. Its idea of complete independence, the movement of civil 
disobedience and non-payment of land revenue which the Congress once 
launched have undoubtedly given that reputation. But many people forget 
that a revolutionary party is not necessarily a radical party. Whether a 
revolutionary party is also a radical party must depend upon the social 
and emotional realities which bring on or induce the revolutionary 
activity. The Barons of England who under Simon de Mandfort rose 
against King John in 1215 and compelled him to sign the Magna Charta 
must be classed as revolutionaries along with the Peasants of England 
who in 1381 rose in rebellion under Wat Tyler against their masters 
and who were all hanged for their rebellious acts. But who can say that 
the Barons because they were revolutionaries were also radical ? The 
Barons rebelled because they wanted the rights of their class against 
the King and the peasants established. The Barons revolt was fed by 
the social emotion of those who were frustrated of power. The emotions 
behind the peasants revolt were those who were oppressed and who 
were hungering for food and freedom and that is why the peasants 
were both revolutionary as well as radical. The revolt of the Congress 
is more like the revolt of the Peasants. The Congress under Gandhi 
is as radical as the Barons were under Simon de Mandfort. Just as 
the Barons revolt was fed by the social emotions of those who were 
frustrated of power and not by the emotions of those who were toiling 
and hungering so was the Congress revolt against the British. It is true 
that the Congress gathered a large following from the masses but that 
was by appealing to their anti-British feeling which is natural to all 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


346 


346 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Indians. It is also true that emotions of these were those who were 
frustrated of food and freedom. But their emotions were in conflict of 
those socially advanced and the propertied classes. And the latter had all 
along been the governing class in the Congress. The masses have been 
camp followers. It is their emotions which has all along determined the 
character of the Congress. Their emotions are of those who are frustrated 
of power. That is why the Congress has been only revolutionary body 
and has not been a radical party. The truth of this can be seen by any 
one who cares to examine the record of the Congress Governments. 
Their achievement since they have taken over are just a miscellaneous 
collection of trifling trinkets. They have shot down the workers more 
readily than the British and have released criminals sentenced by the 
High Courts on no other ground than that they have the authority to 
do it. It is a surprize to me — it is not me — that the Congress has so 
soon shown that it is just a counter-part of the Tories in England. The 
governing class in the Congress has lost all its fervour for revolution, for 
driving the British out. Having now got a field to exploit the masses they 
want to stick on the power and authority to do the job thoroughly and 
do not wish to be disturbed by any thought of anti-imperialism at all. 

Not being radical party the Congress cannot be trusted to undertake 
a radical programme of social and economic reconstruction without 
which the Untouchables can never succeed in improving their lot. For 
the Untouchables to join such a party is a futile and senseless thing. 
The Congress will not do anything for them but will only use them as 
they have done. 

The Congress might do something for the Untouchables if it was 
compelled to do by force of circumstances. There is only one circumstance 
in which the Congress would feel such a compulsion — that is when 
the Congress finds itself dependent upon the representatives of the 
Untouchables for its majority in the Legislature. Then the Untouchables 
would be in a position to dictate their terms to the Congress and the 
Congress would be bound to accept them. In such a contingency it would 
be worth the while of the Untouchables to join the Congress in a coalition. 
It would be real bargain. But today the Congress has everywhere such 
large majorities that in the legislatures it is its own master. It is not 
dependent on any outside support. The Untouchables who are in it are 
at the end of the tail and the tail so lengthened that it cannot wag. 
This is the second reason why joining the Congress can be of no benefit 
to the Untouchables. 

Such are the disadvantages that have arisen from the Untouchables 
having joined the Congress. They are not merely disadvantages. I call 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


347 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 347 

them dire consequences. All social movement has become dead. All 
political power has become migratory. It is understatement to say that 
under the new Constitution the Untouchables are marking time. The 
fact is that they have been put in chains. 

But the question will undoubtedly be asked and it is this — If such 
are the consequences of joining the Congress why did these Untouchables 
join it ? Why did they not fight their elections independently and in 
opposition to the Congress ? Some of the Untouchables who stood on 
the Congress ticket were just careerists, men on the make who wanted 
to climb into the Legislature so as to be within call when the places of 
office of profit come for distribution. They did not care by whose ladder 
they climbed. The Congress being the biggest party and its pass the 
surest way of being admitted into the Legislature these careerists felt 
that to join the Congress was the easiest way of electoral success. They 
did not want to take any chance. This however explains their object. It 
does not explain the cause which forced them to join the Congress. I am 
sure even these careerists would not have joined the Congress if it was 
possible for them to have got themselves elected independently of the 
Congress. They joined the Congress only because they found that that 
course was impossible. Why were they compelled to join the Congress ? 
The answer is that it was due to the system of joint electorates which 
caused the mischief which was introduced by the Poona Pact. 

A joint electorate for a small minority and a vast majority is bound to 
result in a disaster to the minority. A candidate put up by the minority 
cannot be successful even if the whole of the minority were solidly 
behind him. The fact that a seat is reserved for a minority merely gives 
a security that the minority candidate will be declared elected. But it 
cannot guarantee that the minority candidate declared elected will be 
a person of its choice if the election is to be by a joint electorate. Even 
if a seat is reserved for a minority, a majority can always pick up a 
person belonging to the minority and put him up as a candidate for the 
reserved seat as against a candidate put up by the minority and get 
him elected by helping its nominee with the superfluous voting strength 
which is at its command. The result is that the representative of the 
minority elected to the reserved seat instead of being a champion of the 
minority is really the slave of the majority. 

In the system of electorates now formed for election to the Legislature, 
the Untouchable voters as against the caste Hindu voters are placed in a 
hopeless minority. A few instances will show how great is the discrepancy 
in the relative voting strength of the Untouchables and the caste Hindus 
in the different constituencies. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


348 


348 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The power to do mischief in elections which a joint electorate gives 
to a majority is increased immensely if the electoral system is based on 
the principle of a single member constituency. 

In a system of joint electorates with reserved seats for a minority a 
constituency must always be a plural member constituency i.e. there must 
be one seat for the minority and at least one seat for the majority. In 
other words it must be what is called a plural member constituency. This 
plural member constituency must be small one i.e. the majority community 
may have just two seats as against the one assigned to the minority. It 
may be a large one i.e. the majority may have a larger number of seats 
assigned to it. This is an important consideration because the smaller 
the number of seats the greater the power of mischief which the majority 
gets. This will be clear if it is borne in mind that when a majority has 
fewer seats it can release a large portion of its voting strength to get 
its own nominee from the minority elected to the reserved seats and 
defeat the nominee of the minority. On the other hand if the majority 
is assigned a larger number of seats, there a competition among the 
candidates is greater, the voters of the majority community are for the 
most part (busy)* in fighting out the election to the seats assigned to 
the majority and very few at all can be released to help the nominee of 
the majority for the minority seat. In a joint electorate the safety of the 
minority lies in the majority having a larger number of seats to contest. 
Otherwise it is sure to be overwhelmed by the majority. 

In the electoral system now framed for the caste Hindus the principle 
that is adopted is that of the single member constituency. It is true that 
on the face of it the constituency taken as a whole appear to be a plural 
member constituency. But, in fact, the constituency so far as the caste 
Hindus are concerned are single member constituencies. The consequence 
of this single member constituency system for Caste Hindus is that the 
Hindus are able to release an enormous lot of their superfluous votes 
and flood the election for the seats reserved for the Untouchables and 
keep their nominee for the reserved seat afloat. 

The Hindus were anxious to forge further means for nullifying 
the benefit of the Poona Pact. The Poona Pact having been concluded 
in a hurry, it left many things undefined. Of the things that were 
left undefined and about which there arose subsequently a keen 
controversy were the following : (1) Does the ‘panel of four’ to 
be elected at the primary election imply four as a maximum or a 
minimum ? (2) What was to be the method of voting in the final joint 
electorate with the Hindus ? The Hammond Committee which had 
to decide upon these issues found that there were two diametrically 

*Inserted by Editors. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


349 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 349 

opposite views in regard to these two questions, one view held by the 
Caste Hindus and the other held by the Untouchables. It was contended 
on behalf of the Caste Hindus that the panel of four was intended to 
be a minimum. If four candidates are not forthcoming there could be no 
primary election and therefore there can be no election for the reserved 
seat, which they said must remain vacant and the Untouchables should 
go without representation. The Untouchables contended that four was 
the maximum. Four in the Poona Pact meant “not more than four”. It 
did not mean “not less than four”. On the question of voting the caste 
Hindus contended that the compulsory distributive vote was the most 
appropriate. The Untouchables on the other hand insisted that the 
cumulative system of voting was the proper system to be introduced. 

The Hammond Committee accepted the view propounded by the 
Untouchables and rejected those of the Caste Hindus. All the same it 
is interesting to know why the caste Hindus put forth their contentions. 

The reason why the Hindus wanted four in the panel and not less 
was quite obvious. The object of the Hindus is to get elected in the 
final election such a representative of the Untouchables as would be 
most ready and willing to compromise with Hindus and Hinduism. To 
get him elected in the final election he must first come in the Panel. A 
most compromising Untouchable can come in the Panel only when the 
panel is a large panel. 

If there is only one candidate in the Panel then he would be the 
staunchest representative of the Untouchable and worst from the 
standpoint of the Hindus. If there are two, the second will be less staunch 
than the first and therefore good from the standpoint of the Hindus. 
If there are three, the third will be less staunch than the second and 
therefore better from the standpoint of the Hindus. If there be four, the 
fourth will be less staunch than the third and therefore best from the 
point of view of the Hindus. The Panel of four gives the Hindus the best 
chance of getting into the Panel such representative of the Untouchables 
as is most compromising in his attitude towards Hindus and Hinduism 
and that is why they insisted that the Panel should be at least of four. 

The object of insisting upon the system of compulsory distributive 
vote was just supplementary to the idea of having the Panel of not 
less than four. Under the cumulative vote the elector has as many 
votes as there are seats, but may plump them all for one candidate or 
distribute them over two or more candidates as he may desire. Under 
the distributive system of voting the elector has also as many votes as 
there are seats, but he can give only one vote to any one candidate. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


350 


350 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Although the two look different yet in effect there may be no difference 
because even under the cumulative vote a voter is not prevented from 
distributing his votes. He is free to give one vote to one candidate. But 
the Hindus did not want to take any chance. Their main object was to 
flood the election to the seat reserved for the Untouchables in the joint 
electorate by using the surplus votes of the caste Hindus in favour of the 
Untouchable candidate who happens to be their nominee. The object was 
to outnumber the Untouchable voters and prevent them from electing 
their own nominee. This cannot be done unless the surplus votes of the 
caste Hindu voters were divested from the caste Hindu candidate towards 
the Untouchable candidates. There is a greater chance of the diversion 
of these surplus votes under the distributive system than there is under 
the cumulative system. Under the former the caste Hindu voter can give 
only one vote to the caste Hindu candidate. The other vote not being 
of use to the caste Hindu candidate is usable only for an Untouchable 
candidate. With the distributive system there was more chance of flooding 
the election to the seat reserved for the Untouchables and this is why 
they preferred it to the system of cumulative vote. But they want to take 
a chance. Even the distributive system from their point of view was not 
foolproof. Under the distributive system there was no compulsion upon 
the voter to use all his votes. He may use one vote for the caste Hindu 
candidate and not use the rest of his votes. If this happens the purpose 
of getting in their untouchable nominee would be defeated. Not to leave 
things to chance the Hindus wanted that the distributive system of 
voting should be made compulsory so that a caste Hindu voter whether 
he wants it or not can have no option but to vote for the untouchable 
candidate who may be the nominee of the Hindus. 

The two proposals were thus a part of a deep conspiracy on the part 
of the Hindus. They were rejected by the Hammond Committee. But 
there are enough elements of mischief in the Poona Pact itself that the 
rejection of these two proposals has in no way weakened the power of 
the Hindus to render nugatory the right of special representation granted 
to the Untouchables. 

Notwithstanding the political disaster which has overtaken the 
Untouchables and which is the result of the Poona Pact, there are not 
wanting friends of Mr. Gandhi who hold out the Poona Pact as a great 
boon to the Untouchables. 

Firstly it is alleged that the Poona Pact gave the Untouchables larger 
number of seats than was given to them by the Communal Award. It 
is true that the Poona Pact gave the Untouchables 151 seats while 
the Award had only given them 78. But to conclude from this that the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


351 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 351 

Poona Pact gave them more than what was given by the Award is to 
ignore what the Award had in fact given to the Untouchables. 

The Communal Award gave the Untouchables two benefits : (i) a fixed 
quota of seats to be elected by separate electorates for Untouchables and 
to be filled by persons belonging to the Untouchables, (ii) Double vote, 
one to be used through separate electorates and the other to be used 
in the general electorates. 

Now if the Poona Pact increased the fixed quota of seats it also took 
away the right to the double vote. This increase in seats can never be 
deemed to be a compensation for the loss of the double vote. The second 
vote given by the Communal Award was a priceless privilege. Its value 
as a political weapon was beyond reckoning. The voting strength of 
the Untouchables in each constituency is one to ten. With this voting 
strength free to be used in the election of caste Hindu candidates, the 
Untouchables would have been in a position to determine, if not to 
dictate, the issue of the General Election. No Caste Hindu candidate 
could have dared to neglect the Untouchables in his constituency or be 
hostile to their interest if he was made dependent upon the votes of the 
Untouchables. Today the Untouchables have a few more seats than were 
given to them by the Communal Award. But this is all that they have. 
Every other member is indifferent if not hostile. If the Communal Award 
with its system of double voting had remained, the Untouchables would 
have had a few seats less but every other member would have been a 
member for the Untouchables. The increase in the number of seats for 
the Untouchables is no increase at all. 

Admitting for the sake of argument that the Poona Pact did give to 
the Untouchables a few more seats, the question still remains of what 
use are these additional seats. Ordinarily a right to vote is deemed to 
be sufficient as a means of political protection. But it was felt that in 
the case of the Untouchables mere right to vote would not be enough. 
It was feared that a member elected on the votes of the Untouchables, 
if he is himself not an Untouchable, might play false and might take no 
interest in them. It was held that the grievances of the Untouchables must 
be ventilated in the Legislature and that the surest way of ensuring it 
would be to provide that a certain number of seats shall be reserved for 
them so that the Untouchables shall be represented by Untouchables in 
the Legislature. It is now evident that this hope has not been fulfilled. 
The Communal Award no doubt gave fewer seats. But they would have 
been all of them freemen. The Poona Pact gave more but they are all 
filled by bondsmen. If to have a platoon of bondsmen is an advantage 
then the Poona Pact may be said to be advantage. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


352 


352 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The second argument in favour of the Poona Pact is that in 
abolishing separate electorates it saved the Untouchables from 
being eternally branded as Untouchables. In one of his speeches 
delivered in London Mr. Gandhi said : 

“Muslims and Sikhs are all well organized. The ‘untouchables’ 
are not. There is very little political consciousness among them 
and they are so horribly treated that I want to save them against 
themselves. If they had separate electorates their lives would be 
miserable in villages which are the strongholds of Hindu orthodoxy. 

It is the superior class of Hindus who have to do penance for having 
neglected the ‘untouchables’ for ages. That penance can be done 
by active social reform and by making the lot of the ‘untouchables’ 
more bearable by acts of service, but not by asking for separate 
electorates for them. By giving them separate electorates you will 
throw the apple of discord between the ‘untouchables’ and the 
orthodox. You must understand I can tolerate the proposal for 
special representation of the Musalmans and the Sikhs only as a 
necessary evil. It would be a positive danger for the ‘untouchables’. 

I am certain that the question of separate electorates for the 

‘untouchables’ is modern manufacture of Government. The 

only thing needed is to put them on the voters’ list, and provide 
for fundamental rights for them in the constitution. In case they 
are unjustly treated and their representative is deliberately 
excluded, they would have the right to special election tribunal 
which would give them complete protection. It should be open to 
these tribunals to order the unseating of an elected candidate and 
the election of the excluded man.” 

“Separate electorates to the ‘untouchables’ will ensure them 
bondage in perpetuity. The Musalmans will never cease to be 
Musalmans by having separate electorates. Do you want the 
‘untouchables’ to remain ‘untouchables’ for ever ? Well, the 
separate electorates would perpetuate the stigma. What is needed 
is destruction of untouchability, and when you have done it, the 
bar sinister which has been imposed by an insolent ‘superior’ class 
upon an ‘inferior’ class will be destroyed. When you have destroyed 
the bar sinister, to whom will you give the separate electorates ? 
Look at the history of Europe. Have you got separate electorates 
for the working classes or women ? With adult franchise, you give 
the ‘untouchables’ complete security. Even the orthodox would 
have to approach them for votes.” 

“How then, you ask, does Dr. Ambedkar, their representative, 
insist on separate electorates for them ? I have the highest regard for 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


353 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 353 

Dr. Ambedkar. He has every right to be bitter. That he does not 
break our heads is an act of self-restraint on his part. He is today 
so much saturated with suspicion that he cannot see anything else. 

He sees in every Hindu a determined opponent of the ‘untouchables’, 
and it is quite natural. The same thing happened to me in my early 
days in South Africa, where I was hounded out by the Europeans 
wherever I went. It is quite natural for him to vent his wrath. But 
the separate electorates that he seeks will not give him social reform. 

He may himself mount to power and position but nothing good 
will accrue to the ‘untouchables’. I can say all this with authority, 
having lived with the ‘untouchables’ and having shared their joys 
and sorrows all these years.” 

His argument it is true derives some support from the Simon 
Commission which also observed : 

{The following extracts are not quoted in the MS. They are reproduced 
here from Dr. Ambedkar’s ‘What Congress and Gandhi have done to the 
Untouchables’, Appendix VI, p. 327. — Ed.) 

(Extracts from the Report of the Simon Commission, Vol. II) 

78. ... ... In no other province has it been possible to get an 

estimate of the number of the depressed classes who are qualified to 
vote. It is clear that even with a considerable lowering of the franchise — 
which would no doubt increase the proportion of the depressed class 
voters — there would be no hope of the depressed classes getting their 
own representatives elected in general constituencies without special 
provision being made to secure it. In the long run the progress of the 
depressed classes, so far as it can be secured by the exercise by them 
of political influence, will depend on their getting a position of sufficient 
importance for other elements to seek their support and to consider their 
needs. 

* 

80. ... ... It will be seen, therefore, that we do not recommend 

allocating seats to the depressed classes on the basis of their full 
population ratio. The scale of reserved representation suggested will 
secure a substantial increase in the number of the M.L.C.s drawn from 
the depressed classes. The poverty and want of education which so widely 
prevail amongst them make it extremely doubtful whether a large number 
of adequately equipped members could be at once provided, and it is far 
better that they should be represented by qualified spokesmen rather than 
by a larger number of ineffectives who are only too likely to be subservient 
to higher castes. The re-distribution of seats which is now being attempted 
among different kinds of representatives cannot be permanent, and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


354 


354 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

provision must be made for its revision. But we think that our proposal 
is adequate for the present, especially as the representation of opinion 
by reservation of seats does not exclude the possibility of the capture of 
other seats not so reserved. 

But that this argument is silly there can be no doubt about it. To 
put a man in a separate category from others is not necessarily an 
evil. Whether the affixing of a label is good or bad depends upon the 
underlying purpose. If the object is to deprive him of rights then such 
a labelling would no doubt be a grievous wrong. But if the purpose is 
to mark off as a recipient of a privilege then far from being a wrong 
it would be a most beneficial measure. To enrol an untouchable in a 
separate electoral roll would be objectionable if the object was to deprive 
him of the right of franchise. To enrol him in a separate electoral roll 
for giving him the benefit of special representation would certainly be an 
advantage to him. Looked at from the point of view of ultimate purpose 
it is difficult to see how any person who claims to be the friend of the 
untouchables could object to separate electorates for them. Not only the 
argument of Gandhi against separate electorate was silly it was also 
insincere. Gandhi objected to separate electorates because it involved 
labelling of the Untouchables. But how is this labelling avoided in joint 
electorates it is difficult to understand. The reservation of a seat for the 
Untouchables in a joint electorate must and does involve such labelling 
for the candidate claiming the benefit of the reserved must in law declare 
that he is an untouchable. To that extent there is certainly a labelling 
involving in the Joint Electorate and Mr. Gandhi should have objected 
to joint electorates as violently as he did to separate electorates. Either 
Mr. Gandhi was insincere or that he did not know what he was talking 
about. 

Friends of Mr. Gandhi do not stop to consider how far under the 
Poona Pact the Untouchables have been able to send independent men to 
represent them in the Legislature and whether these representatives have 
been putting up any fight and how well they are succeeding. If they stopped 
to do it they would be ashamed to sing the praises of the joint electorates 
and the Poona Pact. The Congress and the Hindus have shamefully abused 
their power and their resources as a majority community. Not only have 
they prevented the Untouchables from electing persons of their choice, not 
only have they got their own nominees elected by the use of their surplus 
votes, they have done something for which any decent party in any part 
of the world ashamed of itself. The selection of the candidates from the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


355 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 355 

untouchables made by the Congress to fill the seats reserved for the 
Untouchables was a most cowardly and a blackguardly act. 

It was open to the Congress — which is simply a political surname 
for Hindus — to allow the Untouchables the benefits of more seats than 
those fixed for them by the Poona Pact. They could have done that 
by adopting untouchable candidates to contest general seats. There 
was nothing in law to prevent them from doing so. The Congress did 
nothing of the kind. This shows that if no seat had been reserved to 
the Untouchables, the Hindus would never have cared to see that an 
untouchable was returned to the legislature. On the other hand when 
seats were reserved, the Hindus came forward to spoil the effect of the 
reservation by seeing to it that the seats went to such untouchables as 
agreed to be their slaves. 

Thus there has been a tragic end to this fight of the untouchables 
for political rights. I have no hesitation in saying that Mr. Gandhi is 
solely responsible for this tragedy. 

Mr. Gandhi’s cry against the Communal Award on the ground that 
it prescribed separate electorates was absolutely false and if the Hindus 
had not become maddened by his fast they would have seen that it was 
so. The Communal Award had also a provision for joint electorates in 
addition to separate electorates. The second vote given to the Untouchables 
was to be exercised in a general electorate in the election of a Caste 
Hindu candidate. This was undoubtedly a system of joint electorates. 
The difference between the Communal Award and the Poona Pact does 
lie in the nature of electorates. Both provide for joint electorates. The 
difference lies in this, joint electorate of the Communal Award was 
intended to enable the Untouchables to take part and influence the 
election of the Caste Hindu candidate while the joint electorate of the 
Poona Pact is intended to enable the caste Hindus to take part and 
influence the election of the Untouchable candidates. This is the real 
difference between the two. 

What would a friend of the Untouchables wish? Would he support 
the joint electorates of the Communal Award or the joint electorates of 
the Poona Pact ? There can be no doubt that the real salvation of the 
Untouchables lies in making the Hindus dependent upon the suffrages of 
the Untouchables. This is what the Communal Award did. To make the 
Untouchables depend upon the suffrages of the Hindus is to make them 
the slaves of the Hindus which they already are. This is what the Poona 
Pact does. The Communal Award was intended to free the Untouchables 
from the thraldom of the Hindus. The Poona Pact is designed to place 
them under the domination of the Hindus. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


356 


356 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

This ‘Fast unto Death’ of Mr. Gandhi was described in glorious terms 
by his friends and admirers both in India and outside. It was described 
as ‘second crucifixion’, as ‘martyrdom’ and as ‘ Triumphal struggle’. An 
American friend of Mr. Gandhi assured the Americans that in laying 
down his life Mr. Gandhi was neither a ‘trickster’ nor a stick demagogue. 
Another American in his ecstasy went to the length of describing him as 
the incarnation of ‘one against the world’. Of course I was held out as 
the villain of the piece. I had of course my own view of Gandhi’s fast. 
I described it as a political stunt. His utterances had to me always the 
ring of falsity and even of insincerity. 

I had always the feeling that what actuated Mr. Gandhi to fast against 
the Communal Award was not any desire to liberate the Untouchables 
as to save the Hindus from disruption. He was prepared to do that at 
any cost, even at the cost of political enslavement of the Untouchables. 
His disapproval of the Poona Pact was very much like the disapproval 
of the enfranchisement of the Negro by the Southerners after the civil 
war. The ‘Statesman’ and ‘Nation’ came to the same conclusion. It said: 
(' Quotation not mentioned in the MS nor could it be traced elsewhere — Ed.) 

At the time there was this one solitary instance of a view agreeing 
with mine. Even some of the prominent untouchables backed Mr. Gandhi. 
A curious case was that of Mr. Raja whose grievance was that although 
he was a member of the Central Assembly nominated to represent the 
Depressed Classes he was not selected as a delegate for the Round Table 
Conference. He was fighting for separate electorates. Suddenly he changed 
sides and took up the cudgels on behalf of Mr. Gandhi and fulminated 
both against me for demanding and against the British Government for 
granting separate electorates. He developed such a strong love for Mr. 
Gandhi and such a strong faith in the Hindus that no one could suspect 
that he was doing the work of a mere hireling. This is what Mr. Raja 
said in the course of a speech delivered by him on an adjournment motion 
moved in the Central Legislature on September 13th, 1932 relating to 
Gandhi’s fast. 

“Never in the annals of the history of India has the issue of 
the Depressed Classes assumed importance as it has today, and 
for this we of the Depressed Classes must for ever be grateful to 
Mahatma Gandhi. He has told the world, in words which cannot be 
mistaken, that our regeneration is the fundamental aim of his life. 

If world conscience cannot be roused even now to the realization of 
the position of the Depressed Classes, then we can only conclude 
that all instincts of humanity are dead in the world today.” 

* * * 

“The question before the House is the situation created by 
Mahatma Gandhi opposing the grant of communal electorates to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


357 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 

the Depressed Classes. I am sure there is no honourable member 
in this House who will not regret that circumstances should have 
forced such a great personality to take a vow to play on his life, 
but sir, the correspondence shows that Government had enough 
warning. If they did not attach full importance to our considered 
views expressed in our conferences and in the Rajah-Moonje Pact 
I had signed with the President of Hindu Mahasabha, they should 
have taken at least the grave warning given by Mahatma Gandhi 
and desisted from the course of creating separate electorates.” 

* * * 

“Indeed this is my chief attack on the Premier’s letter to 
Mahatma Gandhi. He tells us that he has given separate electorates 
for twenty years to enable us to get the minimum number of seats 
to place our views before the Government and legislature of the 
day. I contend that this privilege we have already enjoyed under 
the Montford reforms which have enabled us to get representation 
in numerous local bodies and in legislatures both provincial and 
central. We are sufficiently organized for that purpose and do not 
need either special pleading or special succour. In future what we 
do need as real remedy for our uplift is definite power to elect 
our representatives from the general constituencies and hold them 
responsible to us for their actions. I do not know why the Prime 
Minister calls the scheme of joint electorates with reservation of 
seats as impracticable. It is already in force in local bodies in Madras 
and some other provinces and has worked very satisfactorily. I 
contend, sir, that the scheme enunciated in the communal decision 
involves our segregation and makes us politically untouchables. I 
am surprised at the argument of the Prime Minister that there 
is no segregation because we can vote for Caste Hindus who will 
have to solicit our votes. But, sir, how can we bring about common 
ideal of citizenship when Depressed Class representatives are not 
to solicit votes of higher castes?” 

* * * 

“The sufferings which my community has undergone at the 
hands of Caste Hindus have been acknowledged by Caste Hindus 
themselves, and I am prepared to admit that there are a large 
number of reformers among them who are doing everything possible 
to improve our status and position. I am convinced that there is a 
change of heart and a change in the angle of vision of Caste Hindus. 
We, Depressed Classes, feel ourselves as true Hindus as any Caste 
Hindu can be, and we feel that the moral conscience of the Hindus 
has been roused to the extent that our salvation lies in bringing 


357 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


358 


358 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


about a change from within the main body of Hindu society and 
not segregating ourselves from them. The course adopted by the 
Government would certainly arrest the progress of this most laudable 
movement. I must say, sir, that the Prime Minister’s letter in its 
entire conception, and expression has disappointed me.” 

* * * 

“The crisis that faces us today is very grave. There hangs in the 
balance the life of the greatest Indian of our time, and there hangs 
in the balance the future of millions of the down-trodden people 
of this country. Is Government going to take the responsibility for 
killing the one and reducing the other to perpetual servitude? Let 
it make its choice well and wisely.” 

* * 

Mr. Raja not only backed the Poona Pact and fought for distributive 
vote which as I pointed out was nothing but a part of the design of 
the Hindus to make the political enslavement of the Untouchables fool- 
proof and knave-proof. Mr. Raja was so much enamoured of his new 
faith in Gandhi and Hindus that he was not satisfied by the disposal of 
the matter by the Hammond Committee. He reopened the matter after 
election by moving a resolution in the Madras Assembly in favour of 
the distributive vote 1 . 

But today after seeing the results of the Poona Pact Mr. Raja seems 
to have been disillusioned. How long he will remain faithful to the truth 
he has discovered is more than I can say. But he has declared himself 
openly as a bitter opponent of the Poona Pact. In a letter to Mr. Gandhi, 
dated 25th August 1938, Mr. Raja says: 

“You remember how, when most of my people were in favour of 
separate electorates so that they may express themselves faithfully 
and effectively in the legislatures, you staked your life on bringing 
them into the Hindu fold not only politically but socially and 
religiously. And I was in no small measure responsible for my people 
going in for a joint electorate with Caste Hindus on the express 
understanding that there was to be no interference with our choosing 
men who would faithfully represent our grievances and wishes. It 
was with this object that the panel election was instituted. 

“All this you know as well as I do. But my object in recalling 
the fact is to show that while on our part we faithfully adhered 
to the Poona Pact, giving up agitating for a separate electorate, 
the Congress Party men in Madras representing the Caste Hindus 
deviated from the Pact, so much so, that our community in the 
Legislative Assembly have to follow the Caste Hindus blindly in 

1 Madras Legislative Assembly Debates. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


359 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 

every measure the Ministry may bring and vote with them even 
in matters which deeply affect the interests of the community. 

“You perhaps remember that at the beginning of the elections 
I protested against the Congress Committee setting up candidates 
for the panel election among the Depressed Classes. You were 
good enough to say that I might allow my community joining 
the Congress on certain conditions placed before us by Mr. S. 
Satyamurti. One of these conditions was that in matters affecting 
their community, the Depressed Class members of the Congress 
Party need not vote with the Congress members but vote according 
to their judgment. 

“The recent debate on the Temple Entry Bill in the Madras 
Legislative Assembly has exposed the ugly fact that all Depressed 
Class Members driven by the discipline of the Congress Party in the 
Assembly voted solidly against my motion for referring the Bill to 
a Select Committee. Could anything be more unnatural and more 
humiliating, proving as it did the subjugation of my community 
by the Caste Hindus represented by Mr. Rajagopalachariar ? 

“You know the provisions of the Bill. It was only a piece 
of permissive legislation making it possible for a majority of 
worshippers of a temple to allow Harijans to worship in the 
temple. There was no element of compulsion or coercion in it. This 
Bill had your blessing. It was drafted by Mr. Rajagopalachariar 
himself and approved by you. 

“At a previous session of the Assembly I introduced the Bill 
with the consent of Mr. Rajagopalachariar, who promised his full 
support to the measure. When I suggested that the Bill might 
be introduced by him as a Government measure, he wanted me 
to introduce it. When I met him last, on the 12th July 1938 and 
informed him that I was giving notice of a motion for referring 
the Bill to a Select Committee he did not object. 

“I do not know what happened in the meantime but two days 
before my motion for referring the Bill to the Select Committee 
came up before the house, Mr. Rajagopalachariar sent for me 
and quietly asked me to withdraw the Bill, which I refused to 
do. When in due course, I moved for the consideration of the 
Bill, Mr. Rajagopalachariar stood up and opposed the Bill and 
requested me to withdraw it, saying that he would introduce a 
Temple Entry Bill on the same lines, only for Malabar and not 
for other Districts. 

“The effect of Mr. Rajagopalachariar’s speech was to defeat 
my motion with my own community men registering their votes 
against the measure, introduced to secure their social and religious 


359 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


360 


360 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

elevation. One effect of Mr. Rajagopalachariar’s opposition will be to 
strengthen the opposition in the country to temple entry as a whole. 

“All this makes me uneasy about the wisdom of our having been 
parties to the Poona Pact in the full belief that the Congress would 
really help in our attempt to secure social and religious freedom. I 
am forced to think that our entering the joint electorate with the 
caste Hindus under the leadership of the Congress, far from helping 
us, has enabled the Congress, led by Caste Hindu leaders to destroy 
our independence and to use us to cut our own throats. 

“In the course of the debate, I asked Mr. Rajagopalachariar 
whether he had obtained your approval of the attitude which he 
so suddenly and unexpectedly assumed and the Speaker said that 
Mr. Rajagopalachariar will be given an opportunity to answer the 
question after I had done. Though he was given the privilege of 
speaking after me, he avoided the question and did not answer it 
at all. 

“I trust that you will give your most serious consideration to 
this question of the attitude of the Congress Ministry in Madras 
towards Harijan uplift, especially with regard to temple entry and 
let me have your view before I answer my community men who 
are very much exercised over this question and are contemplating 
a repudiation of the Poona Pact and an agitation for a separate 
electorate accompanied by direct action of some kind.” 

Mr. Rajah also wired to Mahatma Gandhi, Wardha on 12th September 
1938 as follows: 

“Agitation against Ministry rejection my bill growing difficult 
withstand pressure upon me — Anxiously awaiting reply.” 

Mr. Gandhi replied to Mr. Rajah on 14th September 1938: 

“Dear friend, 

I must apologise for the delay in replying to your letter, I have been 
overwhelmed with work. Now I have your wire. 

I wish you would trust C. Rajagopalachariar to do his best. He should 
be allowed to do the thing in his own way. If you cannot trust, naturally 
you will take the course which commends itself to you. All I know is 
that Harijans have no better friend than him. Go to him, reason with 
him and if you cannot persuade him, bear with him. That is my advice.” 

Mr. Rajah wrote a letter dated 21st September 1938 to Mr. Gandhi 
stating: 

“I should request you on the other hand to give more serious 
consideration to the pledges given to my community during the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


361 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 361 

Yeravada Fast and to the way in which they are carried out by 
your plenipotentiary in Madras. That fast was undertaken by you in 
order to change the Communal Award providing separae electorates 
for my people and to bring them into joint electorate with Caste 
Hindus by promising to spare no efforts to remove untouchability. 
And you have more than once said that temple entry is of the very 
essence of the removal of untouchability. 

“So the question of our being in a joint electorate with Caste 
Hindus and the attitude of the Congress Ministry towards the raising 
of the social and religious status of the community are mutually 
and vitally connected. 

“If we are not free to enter into Hindu Temples, we are no 
Hindus, and if we are not Hindus why should we be in a joint 
electorate with them? Is it for swelling their numbers as against 
Muslims and other communities? 

“If you look at the situation in Madras from this point of view, 
you will realise that the rejection of the Temple Entry Bill is a gross 
betrayal of the Depressed Classes by the Congress Government in 
Madras. 

“Any amount of money spent out of public funds or even from 
private resources for the amelioration of the economic condition of 
my community will be no substitute for the removal of untouchability 
through temple entry. As you yourself once said temple entry is the 
acid test of the sincerity of the caste Hindus in espousing the cause 
of the Depressed Classes. 

“Mr. Rajagopalachariar’s Temple Entry Bill, besides involving the 
tactical choice of a difficult district makes our community subservient 
to the will of Caste Hindus, a policy which is given a further effect 
to, in the appointment of Advisory Boards to assist the Labour 
Commissioner in which Caste Hindus of the Harijan Sevak Sanghs 
in this Province are given Government facilities for guiding the 
destinies of my people. I do not expect you to agree with my views 
on the measures recently introduced by Mr. Rajagopalachariar after 
rejecting the Madras Temple Entry Bill; but I expect you to give 
more serious consideration to the situation in Madras as regards the 
Depressed Classes in the light of the pledges given to the Depressed 
Classes during your memorable fast. 

“You are morally bound to make this a matter of conscience 
and not merely one of political strategy. I assure that if you should 
seek ‘inner light’ on this subject of untouchability and temple entry 
you will speak out more plainly and make the necessary sacrifice 
to educate your followers. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


362 


362 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“I propose to send this correspondence to the press, but I shall wait 
for any further word from you till the end of this month.” 

Mr. Gandhi replied to the above on 5th October 1938: 

“Dear friend, 

“I am working under great difficulty. Even this I am writing in 
the train taking me to Peshawar. 

“Of course you will publish the correspondence between us 
whenever you think it necessary. 

“Your last letter shows that you are in the wrong. I am not 
partial to Rajaji. But I know that he is as firm on untouchability 
as I am myself. I must, therefore, trust his judgment as to how to 
do the thing. From this distance, I can’t judge his action. Do you 
not see that the whole of the movement is one of conversion of the 
Sanatani heart ? You cannot force the pace except to the extent that 
reforms immolate themselves. This process is going on vigorously. 

“This temple entry question is a mighty-religious reform. I 
would like you to apply your religious mind to it, If you will, you 
will give your whole hearted support to Rajaji and make his move 
a thorough success.” 

The Untouchables of U.P. have also expressed their hostility to the 
Poona Pact. In a Memorandum submitted to Col. Muirhead the Under 
Secretary of State in India they said: ( Memorandum not typed in the 
MS.— Ed.) 

All over India the Untouchables have realized that the Poona Pact 
has been a trap and the change of the British Government’s Communal 
Award by Gandhi’s Poona Pact is a change which in reality a change 
from freedom to bondage. 

The Poona Pact was signed on the 24th September 1932. On the 25th 
September 1932 a public meeting of the Hindus was held in Bombay 
to accord to it their support. At that meeting the following resolution 
was passed: 

“This Conference confirms the Poona agreement arrived at 
between the leaders of the Caste Hindus and Depressed Classes 
on September 24, 1932, and trusts that the British Government 
will withdraw its decision creating separate electorates within the 
Hindu community and accept the agreement in full. The Conference 
urges that immediate action be taken by Government so as to 
enable Mahatma Gandhi to break his fast within the terms of his 
vow and before it becomes too late. The Conference appeals to the 
leaders of the communities concerned to realize the implications of 
the agreement and of this resolution and to make earnest endeavour 
to fulfil them. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


363 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 363 

This Conference resolves that henceforth, amongst Hindus, no, 
one shall be regarded as an untouchable by reason of his birth, and 
that those who have been so regarded hitherto will have the same 
right as other Hindus in regard to the use of public wells, public 
schools, public roads, and all other public institutions. This right 
shall have statutory recognition at the first opportunity and shall 
be one of the earliest Acts of the Swaraj Parliament, if it shall not 
have received such recognition before that time. 

It is further agreed that it shall be the duty of all Hindu leaders 
to secure, by every legitimate and peaceful means, an early removal 
of all social disabilities now imposed by custom upon the so-called 
untouchable classes, including the bar in respect of admission to 
temples.” 

Mr. Gandhi felt that an organization which will devote itself exclusively 
to the problem of the Untouchables was necessary. Accordingly there was 
established on 28th September 1932 the All-India Anti-Untouchability 
League. The name, Gandhi thought, did not smell well. Therefore 
in December 1932 it was given a new name — The Servants of the 
Untouchables Society. That name again was not as sweet as Mr. Gandhi 
wished it to be. He changed and called it the Harjan Sevak Sangh. 

The first change which Mr. Gandhi has brought about is this change 
in the name. Instead of being called Untouchables they are now called 
Harijans. To call, the Untouchables say that Mr. Gandhi is selfish and has 
given the name Harijan to the Untouchables to blaster up Vaishnavism. 
They want the Untouchables to be called Harjans the followers of Shiva. 
Mr. Gandhi replies that the term is used to mean God and not Vishnu 
and that Harijan simply means ‘children of God’. 

The Untouchables simply detest the name Harijan. Various grounds 
of objection are urged against the name. In the first place it has not 
bettered their position. It has not elevated them in the eyes of the 
Hindus. The new name has become completely identified with the 
subject matter of the old. Every body knows that Harijans are simply 
no other than the old Untouchables. The new name provides no escape 
to the Untouchables from the curse of untouchability. With the new 
name they are damned as much as they were with the old. Secondly 
the Untouchables say that they prefer to be called Untouchables. They 
argue that it is better that the wrong should be called by its known 
name. It is better for the patient to know what he is suffering from. 
It is better for the wrong doer that the wrong is there still to be 
redressed. Any concealment will give a false sense of both as to existing 
facts. The new name in so far as it is a concealment is fraud upon the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


364 


364 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Untouchables and a false absolution to the Hindus. Thirdly there is 
also the feeling that the name Harijan is indicative of pity. If the name 
meant ‘chosen people of God’ as the Jews claimed themselves to be it 
would have been a different matter. But to call them ‘children of God’ is 
to invite pity from their tyrants by pointing out their helplessness and 
their dependent condition. The more manly among the Untouchables 
resent the degrading implications of this new name. How great is the 
resentment of the Untouchables against this new name can be seen from 
the fact that whole body of the representatives of the Untouchables in 
the Bombay Legislative Assembly walked out of the House in protest 
when the Congress Government introduced a measure giving to the name 
Harijan the sanction of law. 

This new name Harijan will remain until the downfall of Mr. Gandhi 
and the overthrow of the Congress Governments which are his creatures. 
That it was forced upon the Untouchables and that it has done no good 
are however facts which cannot be disputed. 

Having discussed the blessings of this new name I must now proceed 
to examine the work of the Harijan Sevak Sangh. The Sangh is spoken 
of as a memorial to Gandhi’s labours in the cause of the Untouchables. 
What are the achievements of the Sangh. 

The Sangh is an All-India Organization. It has a Central Board. Then 
there are Provincial Boards and under the Provincial Boards there are 
District and Local Committees. The number of Provincial Boards and 
Local Committees is given below: 


1932-33 1933-34 1934-35 

Provincial Boards 26 26 29 

District & Local Committees 213 313 372 

The financial resources of the Sangh are mainly drawn from the 
collections made on an All-India tour specially undertaken for the purpose 
by Mr. Gandhi between November 1933 to July 1934. The total amount 
collected on this tour came to about 8 lacs of Rupees and is known as 
the Gandhi Purse Fund and forms the principal reserve for the Sangh to 
draw upon. The rest of the resources are made up of annual donations. 

The total expenditure of the Sangh under all heads from year to 


year is as follows: 




1932-33 

1933-34 

1934-35 

1935-36 

Rs. 2,31,039.00 

3,31,791.00 

4,48,422.00 

3,99,354.00 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


365 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 365 

In his report for 1934-35 the General Secretary reported that “ almost 
the whole of the Gandhi Purse Fund, which stood at over 8 lacs in July 
1934, will be spent away by the end of the current year, i.e. by the end 
of September 1936.” In the fifth Annual Report the Secretary says, “As 
compared to the expenditure of the previous year, there has been a 
reduction of more than a lac in the total expenditure. This was partly 
owing to the gradual exhaustion of the Gandhi Purse Fund, dislocation 
in the realization of local collections owing to general elections and 
other contributory causes. The finances of the Central office were far 
from satisfactory. The total expenditure of the Central office (including 
grants made to branches) amounted to Rs. 86,610-14-8, as against an 
income of Rs. 42,485-4-9 thus leaving a deficit of Rs. 44,125-9-11 which 
was met from the general fund. Donations for general fund amounted 
to only Rs. 26,173-4.” 

It is obvious that the Harijan Sevak Sangh is a small affair and but 
for the running advertisement it gets from the Press it would not even be 
heared off. India is a vast continent with something like 6,96,831* villages. 
The Untouchables are spread out all throughout these 6,96,831 villages. 
There is no village without its untouchables. How many Untouchables 
can be reached by 372 Committees. It is a tiny peck in a vast ocean. Not 
only its capacity to cope with the problem is limited but its resources 
are too meagre to permit any relief being granted to the Untouchables 
on an adequate scale. The Sangh has now no permanent fund. What 
it had it has spent. It has to depend upon annual subscriptions. That 
source is also drying up leaving the Sangh with heavy deficit. The Sangh 
is in an exhausted condition. Its affairs in fact would have been wound 
up on account of its bankruptcy. If the Sangh is still existing, it is not 
because its endeavours are sustained by Hindu charity directed to the 
uplift of the Untouchables. It exists because the Congress Governments 
which are now established in the different Provinces have come to the 
rescue of the Sangh. They have handed over to the Sangh certain social 
welfare work which former Governments carried out through Government 
Departments or Government Officials with the money grants. Thus the 
Sangh is now living on Government funds. As an institution maintained 
by the Hindus with the help of Hindu Charity for the Untouchables the 
Sangh simply does not exist. 

The din and noise which was created by Mr. Gandhi’s fast was 
simply deafening. The readiness to make sacrifices to save his life 
was great and the eagerness shown to befriend the Untouchables 
was surprizing and overwhelming. All this has vanished leaving the 


*Census Report, 1931. ( Inserted , as the figures are not shown in the MS. — Ed.) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


366 


366 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Untouchables high and dry. If the desire to contribute towards the 
maintenance of the Sangh — which the Hindus founded as an earnest of 
their acceptance of their obligation towards the Untouchables — is any 
measure of the reality of the change of heart then it must be admitted 
that the change has died with the occasion which caused it. Gandhi 
broke his fast and the Hindu lost his new-born love for the Untouchables. 

The premature decay of the Sangh should make it unnecessary for 
me to consider the work it did. But the Sangh is held out as a great 
monument to Mr. Gandhi. It is therefore proper that I should examine 
the work done by the Sangh and the policy underlying that work. 

The work of the Sangh follows certain well defined lines. 

In the field of education the Sangh has sought to encourage higher 
education among the Untouchables by instituting scholarships for the Arts, 
technical and professional courses. The Sangh also gives scholarships to 
High School students. The Sangh also maintained Hostels for Untouchable 
students attending colleges and High Schools. The great part of the 
educational activities of the Sangh is taken up in maintaining separate 
schools for primary stage children where there were no common schools 
in the vicinity or where common schools we’re closed to them. 

Next comes the welfare activities of the Sangh. The medical aid 
which the Sangh undertakes to render to the Untouchables falls under 
this head. This is done by intenerant workers of the Sangh who go in 
Harijan quarters to give medical aid to the sick and ailing among the 
Untouchables. The Sangh also maintains a few dispensaries for the use 
of the untouchables. This is a very small activity of the Sangh. 

The more important part of the welfare activity of the Sangh relates to 
water supply. The Sangh does this by (1) sinking new wells or installing 
tube wells and pumps for the use of the untouchables, (2) repairing old 
ones and (3) persuading local Governments and bodies to sink and repair 
wells for the Untouchables. 

The third line of activity undertaken by the Sangh is economic. The 
Sangh seems to run a few industrial schools and it is claimed that the 
industrial schools run by the Sangh produced a number of trained artizans 
who have taken to independent living. But according to the report, more 
successful and substantial work was done by way of organizing and 
supervising cooperative societies among the Untouchables. 

Such is in brief the record of the work done by the Sangh. It is 
largely directed by the Caste Hindus. There are very few Untouchables 
who have any voice in directing the activities of the Sangh. I have had 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


367 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 367 

no connection with the Sangh. But I might mention that when the 
Sangh was started I was invited to join. I had great desire to cooperate 
with the Hindus for the removal of untouchability. I had my own views 
regarding the policy and programme which the Sangh should adopt for 
accomplishing this task. Immediately after the Sangh was established 
I had to go to London to attend the Round Table Conference and had 
no opportunity to talk the matter over with the other members of the 
Sangh. But I posted a letter to the General Secretary of the Sangh 
Mr. Thakkar on the 14th November 1932 on Board the Ship M. V. 
“Victoria”. Excepting a short introductory para which I omit, the following 
is the full text of the letter: 

“In my opinion there can be two distinct methods of approaching 
the task of uplifting the Depressed Classes. There is a school which 
proceeds on the assumption that the fate of the individual belonging 
to the Depressed Classes is bound up with his personal conduct. 

If he is suffering from want and misery it is because he must be 
vicious and sinful. Starting from this hypothesis, this school of social 
workers concentrates all its efforts and its resources on fostering 
personal virtue by adopting a programme which includes items such 
as temperance, gymnasium, co-operation, libraries, schools etc., 
which are calculated to make the individual a better and virtuous 
individual. In my opinion there is also another method of approach 
to this problem. It starts with the hypothesis that the fate of the 
individual is governed by his environment and the circumstances he 
is obliged to live under and if an individual is suffering from want 
and misery it is because his environment is not propitious. 

“I have no doubt that of the two views the latter is the more 
correct. The former may raise a few stray individuals above the level 
of the class to which they belong. It cannot lift the class as a whole. 

My view of the aim of the Anti-Untouchability League is that it has 
come into existence not for helping a few individuals at random 
or a few selected boys belonging to the Depressed Classes but for 
raising the whole class to a higher level. Consequently I would not 
like the League to dissipate its energies one programme calculated 
to foster private virtue. I would like the Board to concentrate all 
its energies on a programme that will effect a change in the social 
environment of the Depressed Classes. Having stated in general 
terms my views I venture to place some concrete proposals for work 
to be undertaken by the League. 

“I think the first thing that the League should undertake is 
a campaign all over India to secure to the Depressed Classes the 
enjoyment of their civic rights such as taking water from the village 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


368 


368 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

wells, entry in village schools, admission to village chawdi, use of 
public conveyance etc. 

“Such a programme if carried into village will bring about the 
necessary social revolution in the Hindu society without which it 
will never be possible for the Depressed Classes to get equal social 
status. The Board must however know what difficulties it will have 
to face if this campaign of civic rights is to be carried through. 
Here I can speak from experience because I as President know 
what happened when the Depressed Classes Institute and the Social 
Equality League launched such a plan in the Kolaba and Nasik 
Districts of the Bombay Presidency. 

“First of all there will be riots between the Depressed Classes 
and the Caste Hindus which will result in breaking heads and in 
criminal prosecutions of one side or the other. In this struggle the 
Depressed Classes will suffer badly. There has not been a single 
case in the course of the social struggle carried on in these two 
districts in which the Police and the Magistracy have come to the 
rescue of the Depressed Classes even when justice was on their 
side. Secondly the villages will proclaim a complete boycott of the 
Depressed Classes the moment they see that the latter are trying 
to reach a status of equality along with them. 

“I have mentioned only two of the many obstacles which the 
League will have to overcome if this campaign of civic rights is to 
be successful and the League will have to have an army of workers 
in the rural parts who will encourage the Depressed Classes to fight 
for their rights and who will help them in any legal proceedings 
arising therefrom to a successful issue. It is true that this programme 
involves social disturbances and violent scuffle. But I do not think 
that it can be avoided. I know the alternative policy of adopting the 
line of least resistance. I am convinced that it will be ineffective in 
the matter of uprooting untouchability. 

“The silent infiltration of rational ideas among the ignorant 
mass of Caste Hindus cannot, I am sure, work for the salvation of 
the Depressed Classes. First of all the Caste Hindu like all human 
beings follows his customary conduct in observing untouchability 
towards the Depressed Classes. Ordinarily, people do not give up 
their customary mode of behaviour because somebody is preaching 
against it. 

“The salvation of the Depressed Classes will come only when the 
Caste Hindu is made to think and is forced to feel that he must alter 
his ways. For that you must create a crisis by direct action against 
his customary code of conduct. The crisis will compel him to think 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


369 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 369 

and once he begins to think he will be more ready to change than 
he is otherwise likely to be. 

“The great defect in the policy of least resistence and silent 
infiltration of rational ideas lies in this that they do not ‘compel’ 
for they do not produce crisis. The direct action in respect of the 
Chowdar tank in Mahad, the Kalaram temple in Nasik and the 
Guruvayur temple in Malabar have done in a few days what million 
days of preaching by reformers would never have done. 

“The second thing I would like the Anti-Untouchability League to 
work for is to bring about equality of opportunity for the Depressed 
Classes. Much of the misery and poverty of the Depressed Classes 
is due to the absence of equality of opportunity which in its turn is 
due to Untouchability. I am sure you are aware that the Depressed 
Classes in villages and even in towns cannot sell vegetables, milk or 
butter — ways of earning a living which are open to all and sundry. 

A Caste Hindu, will buy these things from a Non-Hindu, but he 
will not buy them from the Depressed Classes. In the matter of 
employment his condition is the worst. 

“Like the Negro in America he is the last to be employed in 
days of prosperity and the first to be fired in days of adversity. And 
even when he gets a foothold what are his prospects ? In the Cotton 
Mills in Bombay and Ahmedabad he is confined to the lowest paid 
department where he can earn only Rs. 25 per month. More paying 
departments like the weaving department are permanently closed to 
them. The place of the boss is reserved for the caste Hindu while 
the Depressed Class worker must slave as his underdog no matter 
how senior or how efficient. 

“Depressed Class women working in the winding or reeling 
departments have come to me in hundreds complaining that the 
Naikins, instead of distributing the raw material to all women 
employees equally or in fair proportion, give all of it to the caste 
Hindu women and leave them in the cold.” 

“I think it would be fit and proper if the Anti-Untouchability 
League were to take up this question by creating public opinion in 
condemnation of it and establishing Bureaus to deal with urgent 
cases of inequality. 

“Lastly I think the League should attempt to dissolve that nausea 
which the touchables feel towards the untouchables and which is 
the reason why the two sections have remained so much apart as to 
constitute separate and distinct entities. In my opinion the best way 
of achieving it is to establish closer contact between the two. Only 
a common cycle of participation can help people to overcome that 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


370 


370 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

strangeness of feeling which one has when brought into contact 
with the other. Nothing can do this more effectively in my opinion 
than the admission of the Depressed Classes to the houses of the 
caste Hindus as guests or servants. 

“The live contact thus established will familiarize both to a 
common and associated life and will pave the way for that unity 
which we are all striving after. I am sorry that many caste Hindus 
who have shown themselves responsive are not prepared for this. 

“During those ten days of the Mahatma’s fast that shook the 
Indian world there were cases in Ville Parle and in Mahad where 
the caste Hindu servants had struck work because their masters 
had abrogated the rules of untouchability by fraternizing with 
the Untouchables. I expected that they would end the strike and 
teach a lesson to the erring masses by filling the vacancies by 
employing Depressed Classes in their places. Instead of doing that 
they capitulated with the forces of orthodoxy and strengthened 
them. I do not know how far such fair-weather friends of the 
Depressed Classes would be of help to them. 

“People in distress can have very little consolation from the 
fact that they have sympathisers if those sympathisers will do 
nothing more than sympathise and I may as well tell the League 
that the Depressed Classes will never be satisfied of the bona 
fides of these caste Hindu sympathisers until it is proved that 
they are prepared to go to the same length of fighting against 
their own kith and kin in actual warfare if it came to that for 
the sake of the Depressed Classes as the Whites of the North did 
against their own kith and kin namely the Whites of the South 
for the sake of the emancipation of the Negro. 

“The League will have to employ a very large army of workers 
to carry out its programme. The appointment of social workers 
might perhaps be looked upon as a minor question. Speaking 
for myself, I attach very great importance to the selection of a 
proper agency to be employed in this behalf. There can always 
be found workers to do a particular piece of work or any other 
for the matter of that if they are paid for it. I am sure such 
mercenary workers will not serve the purpose of the League. 
As Tolstoy said “Only those who love can serve”. In my opinion 
that test is more likely to be fulfilled by workers drawn from the 
Depressed Classes. I should therefore like the League to bear 
this aspect of the question in mind in deciding upon whom to 
appoint and whom not to appoint. I do not suggest that there 
are hot scoundrels among the Depressed Classes who have 
not made social service their last refuge. But largely speaking 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


371 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 371 

you can be more sure that a worker drawn from the Depressed 
Classes will regard the work as love’s labour a thing which is so 
essential to the success of the League. 

“Secondly there are agencies which are already engaged in some 
sort of social service without any confines as to class or purpose and 
may be prepared to supplement their activity by taking up the work 
of the Anti-Untouchability League in consideration of a grant-in- 
aid. I am sure this hire-purchase system of work, if I may use that 
expression, can produce no lasting good. What is wanted in an agency 
is a single-minded devotion to one task only. We want bodies and 
organizations which have deliberately chosen to be narrow-minded 
in order to be enthusiastic about their cause. The work if it is to be 
assigned must be assigned to those who would undertake to devote 
themselves exclusively to the work of the Depressed Classes. 

“Before closing this I wish to say just this. It was Balfour, I 
think, who said that what could hold the British Empire together 
was love and not law. I think that observation applies equally well 
to the Hindu society. 

“The touchables and the untouchables cannot be held together by 
law, certainly not by any electoral law substituting joint electorates 
for separate electorates. The only thing that can hold them together 
is love. 

“Outside the family, justice alone, in my opinion can open the 
possibility of love, and it should be the duty of the Anti-Untouchability 
League to see that the touchable does, or failing that, is made to do 
justice to the untouchable. Nothing else in my opinion can justify 
the project or the existence of the League.” 

This letter was not even acknowledged by the Secretary. That not 
a single suggestion of mine was accepted goes without saying. Even 
my suggestion that the workers of the Sangh should be drawn largely 
from the Untouchables themselves was not accepted. Indeed when the 
attention of Mr. Gandhi was drawn to the fact that the Harijan Sevak 
Sangh had become the hive of mercenary Hindus, he defended it on the 
ground which are clever if not honest. 

1 He said to the deputation of the Untouchables; 

“The welfare work of the Untouchables is a penance which the 
Hindus have to do for the sin of Untouchability. The money that 
has been collected has been contributed by the Hindus. From both 
points of view the Hindus alone must run the Sangh. Neither ethics 

1 This quotation is taken from Dr. Ambedkar’s book ‘What Congress & Gandhi have 
done to the Untouchables’, p. 142. ( This extract are not mentioned in the MS. — Ed.) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


372 


372 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


nor right would justify Untouchables in claiming a seat on the Board 
of the Sangh.” 

Not only were all my proposals rejected by Mr. Gandhi and his 
advisers but in framing the constitution of the Sangh, aims and objects 
were adopted which are quite opposed to those which I had suggested. 1 
At the meeting held in Cowasjee Jehangir Hall in Bombay on the 30th 
September 1932 the aims of the organization were stated to be: 

“Carrying propaganda against Untouchability and taking 
immediate steps ‘to secure as early as practicable that all public 
wells, dharmashalas, roads, schools, crematoriums, burning ghats 
and all public temples be declared open to the Depressed Classes, 
provided that no compulsion or force shall be used and that only 
peaceful persuasion shall be adopted towards this end’.” 

But in the statement issued by Mr. G. D. Birla and Mr. A. V. Thakkar 
on the 3rd November, two months after its inauguration it was stated: 

“The League believes that reasonable persons among the 
Sanatanists are not much against the removal of Untouchability as 
such, as they are against inter-caste dinners and marriages. Since 
it is not the ambition of the League to undertake reforms beyond its 
own scope, it is desirable to make it clear that while the League will 
work by persuasion among the caste Hindus to remove every vestige 
of Untouchability, the main line of work will be constructive, such 
as the uplift of Depressed Classes educationally, economically and 
socially, which itself will go a great way to remove untouchability. 
With such a work even a staunch Sanatanist can have nothing but 
sympathy. And it is for such work mainly that the League has been 
established. Social reforms like the abolition of the caste system and 
inter-dinning are kept outside the scope of the League.” 

These aims and objects are described in one of the Annual Reports 
of the Sangh. It says: 2 

“According to its constitution the aim and object of the Society is 
the abolition of untouchability by reason of birth and the acquisition 
of equal rights of access of public temples, wells, schools and other 
public institutions for Harijans as enjoyed by other Hindus. 

The achievement of this object has led the Society to undertake 
work of a two-fold kind. First, the Society has to bring about such a 
radical change in the sentiments and opinions of Caste Hindus that 
they may willingly, as a matter of course, allow the enjoyment of 
all civic rights to Harijans. Secondly, the society has to put forth its 

1 Reprduced, from ‘ What Congress etc.’ pp. 140-41 as the page in the MS is left 

blank. — Ed. 

2 Report for 1932-33, p. 1. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


373 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 373 

efforts and devote its funds for the educational, economic and social 

uplift of Harijans.” 

The work done and the aims formulated when put side by side raise 
two questions. Firstly is this record something of which the Sangh can be 
proud of? Secondly is its work consistent with the aims of the Sangh? The 
record is very poor. It is much cry and little wool. Certainly as compared 
with the record of work done by the Christian Missions with which the 
Sangh competes, it is not a record of which the Sangh can be proud 
of. But this is a mere matter for sorrow and nothing more. The second 
question is fundamental and therefore one for anxious consideration. 
It is well that the Sangh undertakes to labour in the interests of the 
Untouchables. But its labours must be so planned that out of it will 
come the destruction of untouchability. 

Examined in the light of this consideration what is one to say of 
the work that is being done by the Sangh? The Sangh is openly and 
without abashment supporting separate schools, separate hostels, separate 
dispensaries, and separate wells for the Untouchables. I should have 
thought that that was the surest way of perpetuating untouchability. 
It is surprizing that Mr. Gandhi who threatened to fast unto death 
against separate electorates on the ground that it involved segregation 
of the untouchables should himself sanction a line of activity which 
perpetuates this segregation. In undertaking to render this social 
service to the Untouchables, Mr. Gandhi and his Sangh should have 
forgotten what the Untouchables want. What the Untouchables want 
is not education, but the right to be admitted to common schools. The 
Untouchables do not want medical aid; what they want is the right to 
be admitted to the general dispensary on equal terms. The Untouchable 
does not want water. What he wants is the right to draw water from 
a common well. The Untouchables do not want their suffering to be 
relieved. They want their personality to be respected and their stigma 
removed. Once their stigma is removed their sufferings will go. This 
the Harijan Sevak Sangh does not seem to have realized. The Sangh is 
said to be the friend of the Untouchables and the orthodox Hindu the 
enemy of the Untouchables. One fails to understand what the friend has 
done which the enemy would not do. The orthodox Hindu insists that 
the Untouchables shall have separate schools, separate dispensaries and 
separate wells, the Sangh says — Thy will shall he done. Except the fact 
the orthodox Hindu believes in untouchability and Harijan Sevak Sangh 
does not, what is the difference in practice between the friend and the foe 
? Under both, the untouchable is condemned to separate schools, separate 
hostels and separate wells. If this is so, it is difficult to understand why 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


374 


374 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Gandhi and the Harijan Sevak Sangh should pick up a quarrel 
with the orthodox Hindu if he and his Sangh are not prepared to force 
the issue. Whether the Hindu Shastras recognize untouchability or 
not is only an academic quarrel between Mr. Gandhi and the orthodox 
Hindu. It can do no practical good. On the contrary I am prepared to 
say that it had done positive harm to the Untouchables. In the first 
place it has created enmity between the Untouchables and the orthodox 
Hindus. Before Gandhi picked up this needless quarrel the relations 
between the Untouchables and the Hindus were non-social. The quarrel 
has made them anti-social. Secondly if there was no such quarrel, if 
instead of untouchability being made the issue — which Mr. Gandhi 
does not intend to fight it out — an appeal was made to the orthodox 
Hindu to remove the suffering of the Untouchables, many an orthodox 
Hindu I know would have come forward to help to remove the suffering. 
Mr. Gandhi has reaped the glory for having established the Sangh. But 
the Sangh has neither sought to remove untouchability nor has it helped 
to alleviate the sufferings of the Untouchables. 

Why has the Sangh failed ? My answer is quite definite. I say the 
Sangh has failed because of its wrong politics. 

It has often been said that the Harijan Sevak Sangh is a political 
organization. Mr. Gandhi has always resented such an allegation and 
repudiated it as being false. The General Secretary of the Sangh has 
also protested against it. To use his own words “the Sangh, though a 
sequel of a Political Pact, has no politics”. 

I do not see any reason for the resentment of Mr. Gandhi nor for 
the protests of his Secretary. I wish very much that the Sangh was 
a political organization. The untouchables have obtained a share of 
political power. But power which is not conscious of itself is no power. 
Again power which is not organized is no power. The Harijan Sevak 
Sangh would have been of great use if it had helped the Untouchables 
to organize independent political parties to fight the elections and 
make their political power effective. Nor can I accept the statement of 
Mr. Gandhi and his Secretary that the Sangh has no politics. On the 
contrary I insist that not only the Sangh has a definite line of politics 
and that that line of politics is wrong because it is prejudicial to the 
cause of the Untouchables. 

Since Mr. Gandhi does not admit that the Sangh has politics, one 
must go to circumstances for proof. Circumstantial proof is always 
better than oral testimony because as is well said man may lie but 
circumstances cannot. In this connection I want to rely upon a clause 
in the constitution of the Sangh as a piece of evidence in support of my 
contention. The clause relates to the means to be adopted by the Sangh 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


375 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 375 

for removing untouchability and for securing equal rights to the 
Untouchables along with the Caste Hindus. The clause reads as follows: 

“That no compulsion is to be used for securing rights, but that 

peaceful persuation is to be adopted as the only means.” 

This is a basic principle of the Sangh. It has struck me as strange 
and I am sure it will strike all others as strange. I want to ask the 
question — Why has the Sangh limited itself to peaceful persuation of the 
caste Hindus as the one and the only means of removing Untouchability ? 

Most social reformers, whether religious or rational, seem to 
imagine that men of power will immediately check their pretentions 
and their exactions as soon as they have been told that their actions 
and attitudes are anti-social. But as Prof. Neibhur points out 1 what 
these reformers overlook is an understanding of the brutal character of 
the behaviour of all human groups and the power of self interest and 
collective egoism which dominate all group relations. They also forget 
the fact that races, nations and classes are less moral than individuals 
which compose them and that justice between groups can therefore not 
be achieved purely by educational means. If conscience and reason can 
be insinuated into the resulting struggle they can only qualify, never 
abolish, the injustice. If injustice is to be abolished it must be resisted 
and when injustice proceeds from collective power, whether in the form 
of imperialism or class domination, it must be challenged by power. A 
class entrenched behind its established power can never be dislodged 
unless power is raised against it. That is the only way of stopping the 
exploitation of the weak by strong. 

Why has Mr. Gandhi and the Harijan Sevak Sangh limited their 
means of resistance to the Caste Hindu domination to peaceful 
persuation? Why do they not resist the injustice of the Caste Hindus 
by direct action? I can understand that in organizing resistance to 
injustice, the problem is to find forms of resistence which will not 
destroy the meagre resources for rational and moral action which 
groups do possess. But there can be no difficulty on that account. 
Satyagraha or passive resistance has been found by Mr. Gandhi as 
a form of resistence which is morally beyond cavil. Why does not 
Mr. Gandhi ask the Sangh to launch Satyagraha by the Untouchables 
against the Caste Hindus for the abolition of the injustice against 
the Untouchables. He asked the people of India to offer Satyagraha 
against British Imperialism. Why does he not want to use the same 
means against the caste Hindus in the interests of the Untouchables ? 

1 Moral Man and Immoral Society / passim. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


376 


376 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

What is the answer of Mr. Gandhi to this question? The only answer 
I can see is that it comes in the way of his politics. Mr. Gandhi must 
remain at the head of the nation. I wonder if life would be worthwhile 
to him if for some reason he ceased to be at the head of the nation. 
He is, I think, the most ambitious politician. I know, he regards as his 
rivials those whom he calls as friends. To be at the head of the nation 
means that he must preserve the integrity of the Congress. The Congress 
is ninety nine per cent composed of Hindus. How can Gandhi succeed 
in maintaining the integrity of the Congress if he were to direct the 
Sangh to carry on Satyagraha against the Hindus for the sake of the 
Untouchables. The Hindus would leave the Congress and the Congress 
would disrupt. This is detrimental to the interests of Mr. Gandhi . This 
is the explanation why Mr. Gandhi and the Sangh have adopted peaceful 
persuation as the only means of removing untouchability. It is a means 
which is least likely to hurt the Hindus and the Congress. Not only 
in big matters but even in small matters the Sangh is careful to see 
that the Hindus are not hurt or annoyed. I am told that in distributing 
scholarships for instance the Sangh makes inquiries into the political 
affiliations of the applicant and if it is found that the applicant belongs 
to a community which is against the Congress or the Hindus, he gets 
no aid from the funds of the Sangh. 

I wonder if any one will have any doubts left that Mr. Gandhi and 
the Sangh in limiting themselves to peaceful persuations were controlled 
by political considerations of not annoying the Hindus and disrupting the 
Congress. This is what I meant when I said that the Sangha’s politics 
and that its failure is due to wrong politics. I am sure I am using mild 
language when I describe it as wrong politics. It is treachery if the 
surrender of the interests of his ward by his guardian can be described 
as treachery. 

Mr. Gandhi is often compared with Jesus Christ both by his Indian 
and European friends. What may be the justification for so strange a 
comparison? In one thing I see a complete contrast between the two. Both 
Jesus and Gandhi claimed to serve the lowly. This befriending attitude 
of both was resented by the upper classes. How did the two react? When 
Jesus was taunted by the Pharasees he retorted by saying — ” They 
that are whole have no need of the physician, but they that are sick “. 
How sharp is the contrast between this attitude of Jesus and that of 
Mr. Gandhi. Jesus did not worry about those who were ‘whole’. Gandhi 
is devoted to those who are ‘whole’ and who are sinning at the cost of 
those who are sick and who are sinned against. Gandhi is no physician 
to the untouchables. At best a sympathiser and nothing more. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


377 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 377 

Even as a sympathizer of the Untouchables his sympathy for them is 
limited by two considerations. It is limited by his social aims. Secondly 
it is also limited by his politics. Lest this statement should be doubted, 
I wish to give two instances, one of each which have occurred recently. 
They have occurred not far from Shegaon in Central provinces where 
Mr. Gandhi resides. 

As an instance of the first I refer to what is known in India as 
the Khare episode. In 1938 last there was a ministerial crisis in the 
Central Provinces where the ministry was a Congress Ministry. The 
Prime Minister Dr. Khare fell out with his colleagues. As Prime Minister 
he demanded the resignation of other ministers which they were not 
prepared to give without the consent of the Congress Parliamentary 
Board. But Dr. Khare forced them to give their resignations which they 
ultimately did. Thereupon Dr. Khare formed another Congress cabinet 
and filled the ministerial offices with men of his choice. In his new 
cabinet Dr. Khare included an untouchable as a minister. Dr. Khare’s 
conduct in dissolving the old cabinet and forming a new one without 
consulting the Congress Parliamentary Board came up for investigation 
before the Congress Working Committee. Dr. Khare was found guilty of 
breach of party discipline and was deposed from his primiership. One of 
the accusations levelled against Dr. Khare by Mr. Gandhi was that he 
included an untouchable in his new Ministry. The following is the full 
text of what Mr. Gandhi said to Dr. Khare on this point and reduced 
to writing by Dr. Khare for my sake: 

“Mahatmaji took me to task for including a Harijan in my second 
cabinet. I retorted by saying that it was a Congress programme 
of uplift of Harijans for which Mahatmaji fasted unto death and 
that I did what I could in furtherance of that programme when 
opportunity offered itself and I think I have done nothing wrong 
in doing so. Thereupon Mahatmaji charged me of doing this for my 
selfish ambition. I repudiated this charge saying that any selfish 
motive is disproved by my resignation. Then Mahatmaji said that by 
my action I have thrown an apple of discord among the members of 
that simple community and have rendered disservice to the Congress 
cause by throwing this temptation in their way.” 1 

That this is true and that Gandhi objected to the untouchable 
being included in the Cabinet is evidenced by the fact that when 
a new Congress Ministry was formed in Central Provinces this 
untouchable who functioned as a minister for a day was excluded. He 
should have been included as a matter of form, at least to keep up 

1 This statement was repeated by Dr. Khare at a meeting held in Servants of India 
Society’s Hall in Bombay in support of his cause. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


378 


378 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

appearances. That he was not, shows that Gandhi was opposed to his 
inclusion on principle. 

This is baffling because the Untouchable member of the Central 
Provinces Assembly who was chosen by Dr. Khare for ministership is 
a graduate, is a Congressman and is a strong party-man. Why should 
Mr. Gandhi have any objection to the inclusion of such a person in the 
Congress Cabinet. As a matter of fact if Mr. Gandhi was genuine in 
his professions regarding the untouchables he should have instructed 
all Congress Prime Ministers to include at least one untouchable in 
their Cabinets, if for nothing else, at least for its psychological effect 
upon the Untouchables and upon the Hindus. He should have done this 
irrespective of the party affiliations. Gandhi is not averse to congress 
making coalitions with other non-congress parties in provinces where 
it is not in a majority in order to secure offices. In such coalitions he 
has allowed Congress to include non-congressmen as ministers in their 
cabinets. If Gandhi can allow the congress to do this without losing 
its caste and its colour why Gandhi did not instruct the Congress 
Prime Ministers to include untouchables in the Congress Ministries if 
he wanted that when he talks about his love for the Untouchables he 
should be believed. But the case in the Central Provinces stand on a 
different footing. Here the Untouchable who was taken as a minister 
was a Congressman and a graduate. There could be no objection on the 
ground of his want of qualification or want of political faith. Why did 
Mr. Gandhi object to his inclusion? A crowd of Untouchables went to 
Shegaon to Mr. Gandhi for an explanation. Anticipating this Mr. Gandhi 
had started observing silence, so that no explanation could be had. 
Then the untouchables started Satyagraha against Mr. Gandhi for not 
including an Untouchable in the Central Provinces Congress Cabinet. 
To escape that embarassment Mr. Gandhi left Shegaon and went on a 
tour to the North Western Frontier Provinces for teaching non-violence 
to the Pathans. I am sure Gandhi’s silence on this occasion was not 
to commune with God. It was taken on as a convenient excuse for not 
being driven under the fire of cross examination to disclose his inner- 
most thoughts about the Untouchables. In any case we have no answer 
to this question from Mr. Gandhi. To my mind there can be only one 
answer and that even if Gandhi had opened his mouth he could give no 
better. That answer is that Mr. Gandhi’s ideal for the untouchable is 
a very low ideal and that all that he cares for is that the untouchable 
should be touched and that if he is touched without anybody taking 
a bath nothing further need be done about them. If Gandhi had tried 
and failed he would have been excused. But how can he be excused for 
entertaining so low an aim? Not failure but low aim is a crime. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


379 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 379 

As an instance of the second I refer to what is known as the Bachuma 
incident. If the first instance is baffling this second is gruesome. How 
gruesome it is can be seen from the brief summary of fact which I am 
giving. Bachuma, a small girl, 12 years old and belonged to an untouchable 
family which was living in Wardha (This name is inserted as it was not 
mentioned in the MS. — Ed.). One evening she was decoyed into the house 
of a Mahomedan who was the Sub-Inspector of Police. She was kept 
in his house and during the night this small child was raped by three 
Mahomedans, one was the Superintendent of Police himself, second a 
Sub-Inspector of Education and third a Lawyer. The three Mahomedans 
were tried in a Court of Law and two of them were sentenced to two 
years rigorous imprisonment and the lawyer was acquitted as the girl 
was not able to identify him. The two who were convicted appealed to 
the High Court but the High Court rejected their appeals and confirmed 
their convictions and sentences. From gaol they sent to the Governor-in- 
Council petitions for mercy. But they were also rejected. This happened 
before the Congress came into office. After the Congress came into 
office they submitted fresh applications for mercy to the Minister-in- 
charge. The Minister-in-charge, who was also a Mahomedan thought 
that there was nothing wrong in a Mahomedan committing rape on 
an untouchable girl and decided to set the culprits free. He granted 
the application of one — that of the Inspector of Education who is now 
a free man and is employed on a big job in the Education Department 
of a Mahomedan State. He was to release the other culprit also but 
in the meantime the agitation against him was so great that he had 
to resign his office. Every body expressed his resentment against the 
shameless act of the Minister but Mr. Gandhi has kept mum. So far he 
has not uttered a word of condemnation against this Minister. On the 
contrary he is even now engaged in the confabulations that are going 
on over the question of the reinstatement of this dismissed minister in 
his office which is still kept vacant. One likes to ask if Gandhi would 
have remained so silent and so unmoved if the little girl Bachuma who 
was raped by the three Mahomedans instead of being the daughter of 
an Untouchable had been Mr. Gandhi’s own daughter. Why is Gandhi 
not able to make Bachuma’s case his daughter’s case? There are two 
answers. One is that Mr. Gandhi is not an untouchable. One must be 
born to it. Secondly Mr. Gandhi feels that by condemning the Muslim 
Minister for the sake of Bachuma he might destroy Hindu-Moslem Unity 
the maintenance of which is a fundamental creed of Congress politics. 
Does this now show that Mr. Gandhi’s sympathies for the Untouchables 
are limited by his politics ? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


380 


380 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

What good is a man who is not even free to sympathize according 
to his conscience. 


Ill 

And now the temple entry. This is advertized as another of 
Mr. Gandhi’s boons to the Untouchables. 

This question of temple entry is the outcome of the resolution passed 
at the public meeting of the Hindus held on 25th September 1932 which 
also was the originating cause which gave birth to the Harijan Sevak 
Sangh. This resolution mentioned some of the liabilities of the Hindus 
towards the Untouchables. This list included the removal of the bar 
against the Untouchables in respect of admissions to Hindu temples. 

Although the promise of temple entry was there in the Resolution 
the Untouchables did not insist upon its being fulfilled forthwith. The 
untouchables, at any rate a vast majority of them have not been keen for 
temple entry. When asked by Mr. Gandhi what I thought about temple 
entry I gave my opinion on it in the form of a statement which was 
issued to the Press on February 10*, 1933, and which is reproduced below: 

STATEMENT ON TEMPLE ENTRY 

Although the controversy regarding the question of temple entry is 
confined to the Sanatanists and Mahatma Gandhi, the Depressed Classes 
have undoubtedly a very important part to play in it, in so far as their 
position is bound to weigh the scales one way or the other, when the 
issue comes for final settlement. It is, therefore necessary, that their view 
point should be defined and stated so as to leave no ambiguity about it. 

To the Temple Entry Bill of Mr. Ranga Iyer as now drafted, the 
Depressed Classes cannot possibly give their support. The principle of 
the Bill is that if a majority of Municipal and Local Board voters in the 
vicinity of any particular temple on a Referendum decide by a majority 
that the Depressed Classes shall be allowed to enter the temple, the 
Trustees or the Manager of that temple shall give effect to that decision. 
The principle is an ordinary principle of majority rule and there is 
nothing radical or revolutionary about the Bill and if the Sanatanists 
were a wise lot, they would accept it without demur. 

The reasons why the Depressed Classes cannot support a Bill based 
upon this principle are two. One reason is that the Bill cannot hasten 

*This statement is shown as of 14th February 1933 in Dr. Ambedkar’s ‘What Congress 
etc.’ at pp. 108-13.- Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


381 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 381 

the day of Temple Entry for the Depressed Classes any nearer than 
would otherwise be the case. It is true that under the Bill the minority 
will not have the right to obtain an injunction against the Trustee or 
the Manager who throws open the temple to the Depressed Classes in 
accordance with the decision of the majority. But before one can draw 
any satisfaction from this clause and congratulate the author of the Bill, 
one must first of all feel assured that when the question is put to the 
vote there will be a majority in favour of the Temple Entry. If one is 
not suffering from illusions of any kind, one must accept that the hope 
of a majority voting in favour of Temple Entry will be rarely realised, 
if at all. Without doubt the majority is definitely opposed to day — a fact 
which is conceded by the Author of the Bill himself in his correspondence 
with the Shankaracharya. What is there in the situation as created after 
the passing of the Bill, which can lead one to hope that the majority 
will act differently? I find nothing. I shall, no doubt, be reminded of the 
results of the Referendum with regard to the Guruvayur Temple. But I 
refuse to accept a referendum so overweighed as it was by the Life of 
Mahatma Gandhi as the normal result. In any such calculations, the 
life of the Mahatma must necessarily be deducted. Secondly, the Bill 
does not regard untouchability in temples as a sinful custom. It regards 
untouchability merely as a social evil not necessrily worse than social 
evils of other sorts. For, it does not declare untouchability as such to 
be illegal. Its binding force is taken away only if a majority decides to 
do so. Sin and immorality cannot become tolerable because a majority 
is addicted to them or because the majority chooses to practice them. 
If untouchability is a sinful and an immoral custom, then in the view 
of the Depressed Classes it must be destroyed without any hesitation, 
even if it was acceptable to the majority. This is the way in which 
all customs are dealt with by Courts of Law, if they find them to be 
immoral and against public policy. This is exactly what the Bill does 
not do. The author of the Bill takes no more serious view of the custom 
of untouchability than does the temperance reformer of the habit of 
drinking. Indeed, so much is he impressed by the assumed similarity 
between the two that the method he has adopted is a method which 
is advocated by temperance reformers to eradicate the evil habit of 
drinking, namely by local option. One cannot feel much grateful to 
a friend of the Depressed Classes who holds untouchability to be no 
worse than drinking. If Mr. Ranga Iyer had not forgotten that only a 
few months ago Mahatma Gandhi had prepared himself to fast unto 
death if untouchability was not removed, he would have taken a more 
serious view of this curse and proposed a most thorough-going reform 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


382 


382 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to ensure its removal lock, stock and barrel. Whatever its shortcomings 
may be from the standpoint of efficacy, the least that the Depressed 
Classes could expect is for the Bill to recognise the principle that 
untouchability is a sin. I really cannot understand how the Bill satisfies 
Mahatma Gandhi who has been insisting that untouchability is a 
sin. It certainly does not satisfy the Depressed Classes. The question 
whether this particular Bill is good or bad, sufficient or insufficient, is 
a subsidiary question. The main question is; do the Depressed Classes 
desire Temple Entry or do they not ? This main question is being 
viewed by the Depressed Classes by two points of view. One is the 
materialistic point of view. Starting from it, the Depressed Classes think 
that the surest way for their elevation lies in higher education, higher 
employment and better ways of earning a living. Once they become well 
placed in the scale of social life they would become respectable and once 
they become respectable the religious outlook of the orthodox towards 
them is sure to undergo change, and even if this did not happen it 
can do no injury to their material interest. Proceeding on these lines 
the Depressed Classes say that they will not spend their resources in 
such an empty thing as Temple Entry. There is also another reason 
why they do not care to fight for it. That argument is the argument of 
‘self respect’. Not very long ago there used to be boards in club doors 
and other social resorts maintained by Europeans in India, which said 
“Dogs and Indians not allowed’. The Temples of the Hindus carry 
similar boards today, the only difference is that the boards on the 
Hindu temples practically say “All Hindus and all animals including 
dogs are admitted only Untouchables not admitted”. The situation in 
both cases is on a parity. But the Hindus never begged for admission in 
those places from which the Europeans in their arrogance had excluded 
them. Why should an untouchable beg for admission in a place from 
which he has been excluded by the arrogance of the Hindus ? This 
is the reasoning of the Depressed Class man who is interested in his 
material welfare. He is prepared to say to the Hindus, “To open or not 
to open your temples is a question for you to consider, and not for me 
to agitate. If you think, it is bad manners not to respect the sacredness 
of human personality, open your temples and be a gentleman. If you 
rather be a Hindu than be gentleman, then shut the doors and damn 
yourself, for I don’t care to come.” 

“I found it necessary to put the argument in this form, because 
I want to disabuse the minds of men like Pandit Madan Mohan 
Malaviya of their belief that the Depressed Classes are looking 
forward expectantly for their patronage. The second point of view 
is the spiritual one. As religiously minded people, do the Depressed 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


383 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 383 

Classes desire temple entry or do they not? That is the question. 
From the spiritual point of view, they are not indifferent to temple 
entry as they would be, if the material point of view alone were to 
prevail. But their final answer must depend upon the reply which 
Mahatma Gandhi and the Hindus give to the following question: 

What is the drive behind this offer of temple entry? Is temple 
entry to be the final goal of the advancement in the social status 
of the Depressed Classes in the Hindu fold ? Or is it only the 
first step and if it is the first step, what is the ultimate goal? 
Temple entry as a final goal the Depressed Classes can never 
support. Indeed they will not only reject it, but they would 
then regard themselves as rejected by Hindu Society and free 
to find their own destiny elsewhere. On the other hand, if it 
is only to be a first step in the direction, they may be inclined 
to support it. The position would then be analogous to what is 
happening in the politics of India today. All Indians have claimed 
Dominion Status for India. The actual constitution will fall short 
of Dominion Status and many Indians will accept it. Why? The 
answer is that as the goal is defined, it does not matter much 
if it is to be reached by steps and not in one jump. But if the 
British had not accepted the goal of Dominion Status, no one 
would have accepted the partial reforms which many are now 
prepared to accept. In the same way if Mahatma Gandhi and the 
reformers were to proclaim what the goal which they set before 
themselves is for the advancement of the social status of the 
Depressed Classes in the Hindu fold, it would be easier for the 
Depressed Classes to define their attitude towards temple entry. 

The goal of the Depressed Classes might as well be stated here 
for the information and consideration of all concerned. What the 
Depressed Classes want is a religion, which will give them equality 
of social status. To prevent any misunderstanding, I would like to 
elaborate the point by drawing a distinction between social evils 
which are the results of secular causes and social evils which are 
founded upon the doctrines of religion. Social evils can have no 
justification whatsoever in a civilised society. But nothing can be 
more odious and vile than that admitted social evils should be 
sought to be justified on the ground of religion. The Depressed 
Classes may not be able to overthrow inequities to which they 
are being subjected. But they have made up their mind not to 
tolerate a religion that will lend its support to the continuance of 
these inequities. If the Hindu religion is to be their religion then 
it must become a religion of Social Equality. The mere amendment 
of Hindu religious code by the mere inclusion in it of a provision 
to permit temple entry for all, cannot make it a religion of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


384 


384 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Equality of social status. All that it can do is to recognise them 
as nationals and not aliens, if I may use these terms which have 
become so familiar in politics. But that cannot mean that they 
would thereby reach a position where they would be free and 
equal without being above or below any one else, for the simple 
reason that the Hindu religion does not recognise the principle 
of equality of social status; on the other hand fosters inequality 
by insisting upon grading people as Brahmins, Kashatriyas, 
Vaishyas and Shudras which now stand towards one another in 
an ascending scale of hatred and descending scale of contempt. 
If the Hindu religion is to be a religion of social equality then an 
amendment of its code to provide temple entry is not enough. What 
is required is to purge it of the doctrine of Chaturvarna. That is 
the root cause of all inequality and also the parent of the caste 
system and untouchability which are merely forms of inequality. 
Unless it is done not only will the Depressed Classes reject 
temple entry, they will also reject the Hindu faith. Chaturvarna 
and the caste system are incompitable with the self respect of 
the Depressed Classes. So long it continues to be the cardinal 
doctrine, the Depressed Classes must continue to be looked upon 
as low. For the Depressed Classes to say that they are Hindus is 
to admit their inferiority of status by their own mouth. They can 
call themselves as Hindus only when the theory of Chaturvarna 
and caste system is abandoned and expunged from the Shastras. 
Do the Mahatma and the Hindu reformers accept this as their 
goal and will they show the courage to work for it ? I shall look 
forward to their pronouncements on this issue as I have stated 
it with great concern. But whether Mahatma Gandhi and the 
Hindus are prepared for this or not, let it be known once for all 
that nothing short of this will satisfy the Depressed Classes and 
make them accept temple entry. To accept temple entry and be 
content with it, is to temporize with evil and barter away the 
sacredness of human personality that dwells in them. 

There is however one argument which Mahatma Gandhi and the 
reforming Hindus may advance against the position I have taken. 
They may say, “acceptance by the Depressed Classes of Temple 
entry now, will not prevent them from agitating hereafter for the 
abolition of Chaturvarna and caste”. If that is their goal, I like to 
meet this argument right at this stage with a view to clinch the 
issue and clear the road for future developments. My reply is that it 
is true that my right to agitate for the abolition of Chaturvarna and 
caste system will not be lost, if I accept Temple Entry now. But the 
question is on what side will Mahatma Gandhi be at the time when 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


385 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 


385 


the question is put. If he will be in the camp of my opponents I 
must tell him that I cannot be in his camp now. If he will be in my 
camp, he ought to be in it now”. 

My friend Dewan Bahadur R. Srinivasan expressed himself almost 
in the same terms on the question of temple entry. He said: 

“When a Depressed Classes member is permitted to enter into 
the Caste Hindu temples he would not be taken into any one of the 
four castes, but treated as man of fifth or the last or the lowest 
caste, a stigma worse than the one to be called an untouchable. At 
the same time he would be subjected to so many caste restrictions 
and humiliations. The Depressed Classes shun the one who enters 
like that and exclude him as Casteman. The crores of Depressed 
Classes would not submit to caste restrictions. They will be divided 
into sections if they do. 

Temple entry cannot be forced by law. The village castemen 
openly or indirectly defy the law. To the village Depressed Classman 
it would be like a scrap of paper on which word “sugar” was written 
and placed in his hands for him to taste. 

The above facts are placed before the public in time to save 
confusion and disturbance in the country.” 

But Mr. Gandhi felt otherwise that securing temple entry to the 
untouchables was a liability of the Hindus which ought to be liquidated 
first. Accordingly immediately after the Poona Pact he started a 
campaign among the Hindus for opening the doors of their temples to 
the Untouchables. 

How far has Mr. Gandhi succeeded in this matter is a question 
that may legitimately be asked. But it is difficult to know the truth. 
As a result of the fast, many temples were reported to have been 
thrown open by the Hindus to the Untouchables. How far this was true 
and how far it is a part of lying propaganda which the Congressman 
is so good at it is difficult to say. That many of the temples that 
were opened as a sequel to the fast were purified and closed to the 
Untouchables is beyond dispute. Again the opening of a temple may be 
quite a meaningless act. There are hundreds and thousands of temples 
in which there is no worship. They are occupied by only donkies. 
Instances of such temples can be seen at places of pilgrimage such as 
Nasik and Wai. If such a temple is declared to be open it is not only a 
meaningless act but it is an insult to the Untouchables. Again a temple 
may be opened to the Untouchable. But if it is abandoned by the Caste 
Hindus as a place of worship it cannot be said that it is open in the 
sense that they are welcomed to it by the Hindus. There is yet another 
possibility which must be taken into account in arriving at the truth. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


386 


386 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

A temple may be open to the untouchables in the same sense as the Ritz 
Hotel in London is open to all. We however know that the Ritz Hotel is 
not in fact open to all. It is open only to those who can afford. In the 
same way a temple may be open to the untouchables yet in fact it is 
open only to those untouchables who can afford to enter. If the cost of 
temple entry is assault or social boycott then the cost will be prohibitive 
and the temple though nominally open is really closed. Assault and 
social boycott are a matter of course with the Hindus and it would not 
be too much to assume that in some case the Hindus would resort to 
such means to prohibit the Untouchables who dare to enter a temple 
which is declared to be open to them. If the case is one like this then 
it is a fraud. 

Which of the two classes of cases are more numerous, it is difficult to 
say accurately. But a guess may be made on the basis of certain facts. 
There are two classes of Hindus now in India — the orthodox Hindus who 
care more for religion than for politics and the Congress Hindus who care 
more for politics and less for religion. The former who have no political 
ends to subserve can be honest i.e. true to their convictions however 
wrong they may be. The latter who have to serve political ends cannot 
always take an honest view but are prone to adopt dishonest ways. The 
first method of abandonment though honest brings discredit upon the 
Hindu community in the eyes of the world and is therefore politically 
unsuitable. The second method of opening the temple nominally and 
closing it really by Hindus ( This word is inserted by us against the blank 
space of MS. — Ed.) is politically highly advantageous. It has the merit 
of a system which shows to the world that credit is opened and which 
clandestinely but without the world knowing prevents its being drawn 
upon by the person in whose favour it is declared to be opened. The 
Congress Hindus are more numerous than the orthodox Hindus. That 
being the case I should think that the second classes of cases must be 
more numerous than the first. 

That genuine cases of opening of temples are very few and that most 
of the published reports of opening of temples is just false propaganda is 
clear from the fate of the Temple Entry Bill of Mr. Ranga Iyer brought 
by him in the Central Legislature in 1934. Of that Bill I will speak of 
at a later occasion. 

With this I would have closed this discussion of the subject. But 
Mr. Gandhi insists that a spiritual awakening has taken place among the 
Hindus and relies upon the Temple Entry Proclamation of Travancore. 
I am therefore obliged to deal with this claim. 

The success of temple entry cannot be determined by the number 
of temples opened. It can be determied only by reference to the motive 
with which it is done. Is the motive spiritual ? That can be the only test. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


387 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 387 

Now I say that temple entry is not a spiritual act. It is a political 
manouver. 

Is Mr. Gandhi acting from spiritual motive? In appealing to the 
Hindus Mr. Gandhi said: 

“I have adressed this appeal to you, which proceeds out of my 
soul’s agony. I ask you to share that agony and shame with me 
and cooperate with me, for I have no other end to serve than to see 
Sanatoria Dharma revivified and lived in its reality in the lives of 
millions who at present seem to me to deny it.” 

This soul’s agony was born after the Poona Pact. What did 
Mr. Gandhi think of the Problem of Temple Entry before the Poona 
Pact? Before the Poona Pact Mr. Gandhi was of different opinion. That 
opinion was expressed not very long before the Poona Pact and not long 

before this appeal was addressed to the Hindus from which I have 

It was expressed in Gandhi Shikshan, Vol. II, p. 132. Mr. Gandhi then 
held the opinion that separate temples should be built for the use of 
Untouchables. 

Mr. Gandhi said: 1 

“How is it possible that the Antyajas (Untouchables) should 
have the right to enter all the existing temples? As long as the 
law of caste and ashram has the chief place in Hindu Religion, to 
say that every Hindu can enter every temple is a thing that is not 
possible today.” 

It is obvious that Temple Entry is not original with him and therefore 
not spiritual. The agony is caused by the grave and sudden provocation 
brought about by the demand of the untouchables for separate electorates. 
Mr. Gandhi was afraid of the principle underlying separate electorates. 
He felt that this principle may be extended and may ultimately lead to 
separation and cessation of the Untouchables from the Hindu fold. It 
was to counter this move that he changed his opinion and started the 
temple entry move. The motive of Mr. Gandhi is political and there is 
nothing spiritual about it. 

I do not wish this conclusion to rest merely upon this evidence of 
change of front on the part of Mr. Gandhi. There is abundance of other 
evidence in support of it. 

I will refer first to the Guruvayur Temple Satyagraha which was 
started by a caste Hindu by name Kellappan to secure entry into the 
Guruvayur Temple for the Untouchables. A few facts regarding this 
episode may be interesting. 

1 Quoted from ‘What Congress & Gandhi have done to the Untouchables’, p. 107 
(Not in MS). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


388 


388 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The point to note is the attitude that Mr. Gandhi finally adopted 
in this matter when he was challenged by the leaders of the orthodox 
Hindus. Mr. Gandhi became ready for a compromise with the orthodox. 
The terms of the compromise were as follows. I give them in Mr. Gandhi s 
own words as reported in the papers . 1 

“During certain hours of the day the Guruvayur Temple should 
be thrown open to the Harijans and other Hindus, who have no 
objection to the presence of the Harijans and during certain other 
hours it should be reserved for those, who have scruples against the 
entry of the Harijans. There should be no difficulty whatsoever in 
the acceptance of this suggestion, seeing that in connection with the 
Krithikai Ekadashi festival in Guruvayur, the Harijans are allowed 
to enter side by side with the Hindus and then the temple or the 
idol undergoes purification.” 

Asked if his suggestion was that the temple might undergo purification 
daily after the entry of the Harijans, Mr. Gandhi replied: 

“Personally, I am opposed to purification at all. But if that 
would satisfy the conscience of the objectors I would personally in 
this case, raise no objection to purification. If purification has any 
value, then there are so many possibilities of daily defilement from a 
variety of causes referred to in various texts that there should be a 
daily purification, whether the Harijans are allowed to enter or not.” 

This attitude is not spiritual. It is purely commercial. This is almost 
admitted by Mr. Gandhi. Asked if the compromise suggested by him did 
not still maintain a distinction between the Untouchables and the Caste 
Hindus Mr. Gandhi is reported to have said : 

“The Harijans’ attitude should be this, ‘if there is a person who 
objects to my presence, I would like to respect his objection so long 
as he (the objector) does not deprive me of the right that belongs 
to me and so long as I am permitted to have my legitimate share 
of the days of offering worship side by side with those, who have 
no objection to my presence, I would be satisfied’.” 

I do not know if any self respecting Untouchable would adopt 
this attitude of Mr. Gandhi. On these terms even dogs and cats are 
admitted in all temples when there are no human beings present in 
them. To divide the House of God in time or in space for worship for 
reconciling the rival claims of two opposing classes is in itself a quaint 
or grotesque idea. Mr. Gandhi evidently forgot that worshipping in the 
same temple is quite different from worshipping in common. Temple 
entry if it is to be spiritual must mean the latter. The former accepts 
that the presence of one class is repugnant to the other and proceeds to 

1 Times of India, 3rd January 1933. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


389 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 389 

reconcile the interests of the two. The latter presupposes that there is no 
repugnance between the two classes and that they accept the common 
denominator of humanity as being present in both. 

This shows that Mr. Gandhi is least motivated by spiritual 
considerations. He is in a hurry to bring the Untouchables within the 
Hindu stables so as to prevent their running away. 

Another piece of evidence which goes to disprove Mr. Gandhi’s claim 
that he is acting from spiritual consideration is furnished by his conduct 
with reference to Mr. Ranga Iyer’s ‘Temple Entry Bill’. It shows that the 
soul’s agony is only a picturesque phrase and not a fact. 

Some history of this Bill is necessary to understand the tragedy 
which ultimately befell Mr. Ranga Iyer the author of it. 

Since the new constitution came into operation two Acts have been 
passed in two Provinces by the Congress Governments. One in Bombay 
and another in Madras. There is no substance in the Acts. They do 
not declare the Temples to be open. They permit the Trustees of the 
Temples under their management if they desire and as there is nothing 
to compel the Trustees to do so the Acts are just scraps of paper and 
nothing more. But the Madras Act has a history which is somewhat 
puzzling. The Madras Prime Minister who got the Act passed is 
Mr. Rajagopalachariar. He occupies a very high place in the Congress, 
so high indeed that he is called Deputy Mahatma. If one can solve the 
puzzle the solution will reveal the mind of the Author and therefore of 
Mr. Gandhi who is the living spirit behind all this. 

Let me turn to the Travancore Temple Entry. The proclamation of 
12th November 1936 issued by the Maharaja opening the Temple open 
to the Untouchables is a gorgeous document. It reads as follows: 

“Profoundly convinced of the truth and validity of our religion, 
believing that it is based on divine guidance and on all-comprehending 
toleration, knowing that in its practice it has throughout the centuries 
adapted itself to the need of the changing times, solicitous that none 
of our Hindu subjects should, by reason of birth, caste or community, 
be denied the consolation and solace of the Hindu faith, we have 
decided and hereby declare, ordain and command that, subject to 
such rules and conditions as may be laid down and imposed by us 
for preserving their proper atmosphere and maintaining their rituals 
and observances, there should henceforth be no restriction placed 
on any Hindu by birth or religion on entering or worshipping at 
temples controlled by us and our Government.” 

What spirituality underlies this proclamation? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


390 


390 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The proclamation was issued by the Maharaja of Travancore in his 
name. But the real active force behind the scene was the Prime Minister 
Sir C. P. Ramaswami Iyer. It is his motives that we must understand. 
In 1933 Sir C. P. R. Iyer was also the Prime Minister of Travancore. 
In 1933 Mr. Gandhi was fighting to get the Guruvayur Temple opened 
to all Untouchables. Among the many who took part in the controversy 
over the issue of Temple entry was Sir C. P. Ramaswami Iyer. No 
body seems now to remember this fact. But it is important to recall 
it because it helps us to understand the motives which prompted him 
to press the Maharaja to issue this proclamation. What attitude did 
Sir C. P. Ramawasmi Iyer have regarding this issue in 1933? It will 
be clear from the following statement which he issued to the press 1 : 

“Personally I do not observe caste rules. I realise there are 
strong, though not very articulate, feelings in this matter in the 
minds of men who believe that the present system of temple worship 
and its details are based on divine ordinances. The problem can be 
permanently solved only by a process of mutual adjustment and by 
the awakening of religious and social leaders of Hindu society to 
the realities of the present situation and to the need for preserving 
the solidarity of the Hindu community. 

“Shock tactics will not answer the purpose and direct action 
will be even more fatal in this sphere than in the political. I 
have the misfortune to differ from Mr. Gandhi when he says that 
the problem of temple entry can be divorced from such topics as 
interdining and I agree with Dr. Ambedkar that the social and 
economic uplift of the Depressed Classes should be our immediate 
and urgent programme.” 

This statement shows that in 1933 spiritual considerations did not 
move Sir C. P. Ramaswami Iyer. Spiritual considerations have become 
operative after 1933. Is there any particular reason why these spiritual 
considerations should have been thought of in 1936? 

This qustion can be answered only if one bears in mind the fact 
that in 1936 there was held in Travancore a Conference of the Yezawa 
Community to consider the issue of conversion which was raised by me 
at Yeola in 1935. The Yezawas are an untouchable community spread 
over Malabar. It is an educated community and economically quite 
strong. It is also a vocal community and has been carrying on agitation 
in the state for social, religious and political rights. The Yezawas form 
a very large community. The cessation of so large a community would 

1 The statement is reproduced from Dr. Ambedkar’s, ‘What Congress & Gandhi have 
done to the Untouchables’, p. 318. This was not mentioned in the MS. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


391 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 391 

be a deathknell to the Hindus and the Conference had made the danger 
real as well as immediate. It was this which brought about a change in 
the attitude of Sir C. P. Ramaswami Iyer. The spiritual considerations 
are just an excuse. They did not form the motives. 

How far did this Proclamation change facts and how far it has 
remained a show? It is not possible to get real facts as they exist in 
Travancore. In the course of the discussion on the Malabar Temple 
Entry Bill in the Madras Legislative Assembly certain facts relating to 
Travancore were mentioned by Sir T. Pannirselvam, which if true would 
show that the whole thing is hollow. 

Sir T. Pannirselvam said: 

“One of the arguments advanced by the Premier in support 
of the measure was that temples in Travancore had been thrown 
open to the “Untouchables”. A Maharaja vested with autocratic 
powers did so by an order. But how was it working there ? From 
representations received, he was led to believe that after the first 
flush of enthusiasm, Harijans had left off going to temples, and 
people who used to worship previously before Harijans were allowed 
to enter the temples, had stopped worshipping in temples. He would 
ask the Government to tell them if the measure was really a success 
in Travancore.” 

On the third reading of the Bill, Sir T. Pannirselvam made a statement 
which must have come as a surprize to many. He said: 

“He wanted to know whether it was a fact that the private temples 
of the Senior Maharani were excluded from the proclamation. What 
was the reason for it? Again during the celebration of the marriage 
of the daughter of the Senior Maharani it was found necessary, 
so he was told, to perform purificatory ceremony of the temple. If 
such a purification of temples took place, what happened to the 
proclamation?” 

These facts were not challenged by the Prime Minister. Evidently 
they cannot be challenged. If they are incontrovertible then the less said 
about the Malabar Temple Entry proclamation as a spiritual testament 
the better. 

It would not be proper to close this discussion without adverting to 
the fear which some Untouchables entertain regarding this Temple entry 
movement. It is just a movement of social reform or is it a strategy ? 

The special privileges which the Untouchables have got in the 
matter of politics, in the matter of education, in the matter of services 
are founded upon the fact that they are Untouchables. If they cease to 
be Untouchables their claim to these special privileges could at once be 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


392 


392 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

challenged. If untouchability goes then they would be just poor and 
backward. But as poor and backward they would not be entitled to any 
special privileges which they have as untouchables. What is the plan 
of these protagonists of Temle Entry? Is it just to open temples or aim 
is ultimately to take away the privileges ? This fear is lurking in the 
minds of many a thinking Untouchables. That the fear is a real fear is 
clear from what is happening in Travancore itself. A correspondent of 
mine who represents the All Travancore Pulayar Cheramar Aykia Maha 
Sangham writes to me as follows in a letter, dated 24th November 1938. 
I give below the full text of the letter sent by him to me. 

To Camp Mayyanad, 24-11-1938 

Dr. Ambedkar, Quilon. 

Bombay. 


Respected Sir, 

I have unaffected pleasure to draw your attention to the following 
facts for obtaining the valuable advice from you. Being the leader 
of a Harijan Community of the Travancore State, I think, it is my 
paramount duty to suggest you definitely all the grievances that the 
Harijans of this state are enduring. 

1. The Temple Entry Proclamation issued by the H. H. The Maharaja 
is indeed a boon to Harijans; but the Harijans are enjoying all the 
other social disabilities except the temple entry. The proclamation 
is a check to the further concessions to us. The Government do 
not take any step for the amelioration of the Harijans. 

2. Among 15 lakhs of Harijans, there are a few graduates, half a 
dozen undergraduates and 50 school finals and more than two 
hundred vernacular certificate holders. Though the Government 
have appointed a Public Service Commission, appointments of 
the Harijans are very few. All the appointments are given to 
Savarnas. If a Harijan is appointed it will be for one week or two 
weeks. According to the rules of the recruitment in Public Service 
the applicant is allowed to apply only after a year again, while 
a Savarna will be appointed for a year or more. When the list 
of the appointments is brought before the assembly, the number 
of appointments will be equal to the communal representation; 
but the duration of the post of all the Harijans will be equal to 
one Savarna. This kind of fraud is associating with the officials. 
Thus the public service is a common property of the Savarnas. 
No Harijan is benefitted by it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


393 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 393 

3. There was a proclamation from H. H. the Maharaja, a few years 
ago that three acres of ground should be given to each Harijan to 
live in; but the Officials are Savarnas who are always unwilling to 
carry out the proclamation. Even though the Government is willing 
to grant large extent of ground for pasturing near Towns not a piece 
of the ground is given to the Harijans. The Harijans are still living 
in the compounds of the Savarnas and are undergoing manyfold 
difficulties. Though large extents of ground lay in “Reserve”, the 
applications of the Harijans for granting grounds are not at all 
regarded with importance or listen to. The most parts of the lands 
are benefited by the Savarnas. 

4. The Government nominates every year of the election of members of 
the Assembly one member from each Harijan Community. Though 
they are elected to present the grievances of the Harijans before the 
Assembly, they are found to be the machinery of the Government 
viz., the toys of the Savarna officers, who are benefited by them. 
Thus the grievances of the Harijans cannot be redressed any way. 

5. All the Harijans of Travancore are labourers in the fields and 
compounds. They are the servants of the Savarnas who behave them 
as beasts — no body to look after or protection — every Harijan gets 
only 2 chs (one anna) as the wage in the most parts of the State. 
The social disabilities are the same to them even after the temple 
entry. The workers in the factories in various parts of the State 
of Travancore and the Officers of the State are all Savarnas and 
they are at present agitating for responsible Government. Now the 
Harijans are demanding jobs in Government and in factories but the 
agitation in Travancore is a Savarna agitation by which the Savarnas 
are making arrangements to get rid of Harijans in Public Service 
and factories. They plead for higher salaries and more privileges. 
They pay the least care to the Harijan labourers while the people 
of Travancore are maddened with the agitation of the workers in 
the factories. The standard of salary of Harijan worker is very low 
while the standard of a factory worker is thrice the former. 

6. Due to starvation and proper means of livelihood the heads of the 
children of Harijans are heated as a result of which they are likely 
to fail in school. Before proclamation the duration of concession in 
high schools was for 6 years, now, it has reduced to three years 
by which a good number of students stopped their education after 
their failure. 

7. There is a department for the Depressed Classes and the head 
of which is Mr. C. O. Damodaran (the protector of the Backward 
Communities). Though every year a big amount is granted 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


394 


394 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

for the expenditure, at the end of the year, 2/3 of the sum is lapsed 
by its sagacity. He is used to submit reports to the Government 
that there is no way of spending the amount. 95 per cent of the 
sum allotted for the Depressed Class is spent as the salary of 
the officials who are always Savarna and 5 per cent is benefited. 
Now the Government is going to make some colonies in three 
parts of Travancore. The officers are Savarnas. This scheme is, 
in my opinion, not a success for the Government do not pay 
greater to it. I regret that Travancore Government spends one 
anna for the Harijan cause, while Cochin State spends a rupee 
for the same. 

The majority of the subjects of Travancore are now agitating 
strongly for Responsible Government under an organization “The State 
Congress”. The leaders of this popular organization belong to the four 
major communities of the State namely, the Nair, Mohamedan, Christian 
and Ezhava community. The President of the State Congress Mr. Thanu 
Pillai issued a statement in which he stressed that special concessions 
would be given to the Depressed Class. All the leaders of the Depressed 
Class have been waiting for a time to see the attitude of the State 
Congress. Now we come to understand that there is no reality in the 
promises of these leaders. 

Now I am sure that the leaders have neglected the cause of the 
Depressed Class. The State Congress was started on the principles of 
nationalism and now it has become an institution of communalism. 
Communal spirit is now working among the leaders. In every public 
speech, statement or article, the leaders mention only these four major 
communities, while they have no thought on us. I fear, if this is the 
case of the leaders of the political agitation of Travancore, the situation 
of the Depressed Class will be more deplorable when the Responsible 
Government is achieved, for the entire possession of the Government 
will be then within the clutches of the abovementioned communities and 
the Depressed Classes’ rights and privileges will be devoured by the 
former. In the meetings of the working committee of the State Congress 
2/3 of the time had devoted in discussion concerning the strike of the 
Alleppey Coir Factories; but nothing was mentioned in the meeting 
about the Harijan workers who are undergoing manyfold difficulties. 
The workers in Factories are Savarnas and the agitation for obtaining 
Responsible Government is a kind of anti Harijan movement. The 
motive of every leader of the State Congress is to improve the situation 
(circumstance) of the Savarna. The leaders of the major communities 
have some mercinary attitude who are going to sacrifice the Depressed 
Class for their progress. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


395 


GANDHI AND HIS FAST 395 

These are the conditions of the Depressed Class of the State. What 
are the ways by which we have to establish our rights in the State ? I 
humbly request you to be good enough to render me your advice at this 
occasion. I am awaiting for the reply. 

Excuse me for the trouble, 

Yours faithfully, 
Srinarayanswami.” 

If the plan of Temple Entry is ultimately to deprive the Untouchables 
of their statutory rights then the movement is not only not spiritual but 
it is positively mischievous and it would be the duty of all honest people 
to warn the Untouchables, ‘ Beware of Gandhi. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


396 


Chapter 26 

A WARNING TO THE UNTOUCHABLES 


Revolt and rebellion against the Established order is a natural part 
of the history of the poor in all countries of the world. A student of their 
history cannot but be struck by the thought entertained by them, of the 
way victory would come. In the theological age, the poor lived by the 
hope that spiritual forces would ultimately make the meek inherit the 
earth. In the secular age, otherwise called modern times, the poor live 
by the hope that the forces of historical materialism will automatically 
rob the strong of their strength and make the weak take their place. 

In the light of this psychology, when one begins to think of the 
Untouchables in their role of rebels against the Hindu Social Order one 
feels like congratulating them on their realization that neither spiritual 
forces nor historical forces are going to bring the millenium. They know 
full well that if the Hindu Social Order is to fall to the ground, it can 
happen only under two conditions. Firstly, the social order must be 
subjected to constant fire. Secondly, they can’t subject it to constant fire 
unless they are independent of the Hindus in thought and in action. 
That is why the Untouchables are insistent upon separate electorates 
and separate settlements. 

The Hindus on the other hand are telling the Untouchables to 
depend upon the Hindus for their emancipation. The Untouchables are 
told that the general spread of education will make the Hindus act in a 
rational manner. The Untouchables are told that the constant preaching 
of reformers against Untouchability is bound to bring about a moral 
transformation of the Hindus and the quickening of his conscience. The 
Untouchables should therefore rely on the good will and sense of duty 
of the Hindus. No Untouchable believes in this facile proposition. If 
there are any who do, they are hypocrites who are prepared to agree to 
whatever the Hindus have to say in order that by their grace they may 
be put in places reserved for the Untouchables. They are a predatory 
band of Untouchables who are out to feather their nests by any means 
open to them. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


397 


A WARNING TO THE UNTOUCHABLES 397 

The Untouchables are not deceived by such false propaganda and 
false hopes. It is therefore unnecessary to comment on it. At the same 
time, the propaganda is so alluring that it may mislead the unwary 
Untouchables into being ensnared by it. A warning to the Untouchables 
is therefore necessary. 

Two agencies are generally relied upon by the social idealists for 
producing social justice. One is reason, the other is religion. 

The rationalists who uphold the mission of reason believe that injus- 
tice could be eliminated by the increasing power of intelligence. In the 
mediaeval age social injustice and superstition were intimately related 
to each other. It was natural for the rationalists to believe that the 
elimination of superstition must result in the abolition of injustice. This 
belief was encouraged by the results. Today it has become the creed of 
the educationists, philosophers, psychologists and social scientists who 
believe that universal education and the development of printing and 
press would result in an ideal society, in which every individual would 
be so enlightened that there would be no place for social injustice. 

History, whether Indian or European, gives no unqualified support 
to this dogma. In Europe, the old traditions and superstitions which 
seemed to the eighteenth century to be the very root of injustice, have 
been eliminated. Yet social injustice has been rampant and has been 
growing ever and anon. In India itself, the whole Brahmin community 
is educated, man, woman and child. How many Brahmins are free from 
their belief in untouchability ? How many have come forward to undertake 
a crusade against untouchability? How many are prepared to stand by 
the side of the Untouchables in their fight against injustice? In short, 
how many are prepared to make the cause of the Untouchables their 
own cause? The number will be appalingly small. 

Why does reason fail to bring about social justice? The answer is that 
reason works so long as it does not come into conflict with one’s vested 
interest. Where it comes into conflict with vested interests, it fails. Many 
Hindus have a vested interest in untouchability. That, vested interest 
may take the shape of feeling of social superiority or it may take the 
shape of economic exploitation such as forced labour or cheap labour, the 
fact remains that Hindus have a vested interest in untouchability. It is 
only natural that that vested interest should not yield to the dictates of 
reason. The Untouchables should therefore know that there are limits 
to what reason can do. 

The religious moralists who believe in the efficacy of religion urge 
that the moral insight which religion plants in man whereby it makes 
him conscious of the sinfulness of his preoccupation with self and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


398 


398 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

thereby of the duty to do justice to his fellows. Nobody can deny that 
this is the function of religion and to some extent religion may succeed 
in this mission. But here again there are limits to what religion can do. 
Religion can help to produce justice within a community. Religion cannot 
produce justice between communities. At any rate, religion has failed to 
produce justice between Negroes and Whites, in the United States. It 
has failed to produce justice between Germans and French and between 
them and the other nations. The call of nation and the call of community 
has proved more powerful than the call of religion for justice. 

The Untouchables should bear in mind two things. Firstly, that it 
is futile to expect the Hindu religion to perform the mission of bringing 
about social justice. Such a task may be performed by Islam, Christianity, 
or Buddhism. The Hindu religion is itself the embodiment of inequity 
and injustice to the Untouchables. For it, to preach the gospel of justice 
is to go against its own being. To hope for this is to hope for a miracle. 
Secondly, assuming that this was a task which Hinduism was fitted 
to perform, it would be impossible for it to perform. The social barrier 
between them and the Hindus is much greater than the barrier between 
the Hindus and their men. Religion, however efficacious it may be within 
a community or a nation, is quite powerless to break these barriers and 
(make)* them one whole. 

Apart from these agencies of reason and religion the Untouchables 
are asked to trust the enlightened self-interests of the Hindu privileged 
classes and the fraternity of the Hindu proletarian. 

As to the privileged classes it be wrong to depend upon for anything 
more than their agreeing to be benevolent despots. They have their own 
class interests and they cannot be expected to sacrifice them for general 
interests or universal values. On the other hand, their constant endeavour 
is to identify their class interests with general interests and to assume 
that their privileges are the just payments with which society rewards 
specially useful and meritorious functions. They are a poor company to 
the Untouchables as the Untouchables have found in their conflict with 
the Hindus. 

For Untouchables to expect to gain help from the Hindu proletariat 
is also a vain hope. The appeal of the Indian Communists to the 
Untouchables for solidarity with the Hindu proletariat is no doubt 
based on the assumption that the proletarian does not desire 
advantages for himself which he is not willing to share with others. 
Is this true ? Even in Europe the proletarian are not a uniform class. 
It is marked by class composition, the higher and the lower. This 
is reflected in their attitudes towards social change, the higher are 


*Inserted. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\voI5-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


399 


A WARNING TO THE UNTOUCHABLES 399 

reformist and the lower are revolutionary. The assumption therefore 
is not true. So far as India is concerned it is positively false. There is 
very little for a common front. Socially, there is bound to be antagonism 
between them. Economically, there cannot be much room for alliance. 

What must the Untouchables strive for ? Two things they must strive 
for is education and spread of knowledge. The power of the privileged 
classes rests upon lies which are sedulously propagated among the 
masses. No resistance to power is possible while the sanctioning lies, 
which justify that power are accepted as valid. While the lie which is 
the first and the chief line of defence remains unbroken there can be no 
revolt. Before any injustice, any abuse or oppresssion can be resisted, 
the lie upon which it is founded must be unmasked, must be clearly 
recognized for what it is. This can happen only with education. 

The second thing they must strive for is power. It must not be 
forgotten that there is a real conflict of interests between the Hindus 
and the Untouchables and that while reason may mitigate the conflict 
it can never obviate the necessity of such a conflict. What makes one 
interest dominant over another is power. That being so, power is needed 
to destroy power. There may be the problem of how to make the use of 
power ethical, but there can be no question that without power on one 
side it is not possible to destory power on the other side. Power is either 
economic or political. Military power is no power today. Because it is 
not free power. The economic power of the working class is the power 
inherent in the strike. The Untouchables as a part of the working class 
can have no other economic power. As it is, this power is not adequate 
for the defence of the interests of the working class. It is maimed by 
legislation and made subject to injunctions, arbitrations, martial law and 
use of troops. Much more inadequate is the Untouchables’ power to strike. 

The Untouchable is therefore under an absolute necessity of acquiring 
political power as much as possible. Having regard to his increasingly 
inadequate power in social and economic terms the Untouchable can 
never acquire too much political power. Whatever degree of political 
power he acquires, it will always be too little having regard to the vast 
amount of social, economic and political power of the Hindus. 

The Untouchable must remember that his political power, no matter 
how large, will be of no use if he depends for representation in the 
Legislature on Hindus whose political life is rested in economic and 
social interests which are directly opposed to those of the Untouchables. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-05.indd 


MK SJ+YS 23-9-2013/YS-10-11-2013 


400 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


401 


BOOK IV 


Religious 


One of the schemes of Dr. Ambedkar is “The Conversion 
of the Untouchables”. This scheme includes the 
following chapters: 

(1) Hinduism as a Missionary Religion. 

(2) Christianizing the Untouchables. 

(3) The Condition of the Convert. 

(4) The Eternal Verity. 

(5) The Untouchables and Their Destiny. 

From these essays, Sr. Nos. 2 and 3 have been received 
from Shri S. S. Rege and Sr. No. 1 has been found 
in our papers under the title ‘Caste and Conversion’, 
which was originally published in the Telagu 
Samachar Special No. of November 1926. One more 
typed essay entitled “way from the Hindus”, which also 
deals with religious conversion of the Untouchables, 
has been found and included in this Book. Rest of the 
titles mentioned in the above scheme have not been 
found. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd 


MK SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


402 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


403 


Chapter 27 

AWAY FROM THE HINDUS 


A large majority of Untouchables who have reached a capacity to 
think out their problem believe that one way to solve the problem of the 
Untouchables is for them to abandon Hinduism and be converted to some 
other religion. At a Conference of the Mahars held in Bombay on 31st 
May 1936 a resolution to this effect was unanimously passed. Although 
the Conference was a Conference of the Mahars 1 , the resolution had 
the support of a very large body of Untouchables throughout India. No 
resolution had created such a stir. The Hindu community was shaken to 
its foundation and curses imprecations and threats were uttered against 
the Untouchables who were behind this move. 

Four principal objections have been urged by the opponents against 
the conversion of the Untouchables: 

(1) What can the Untouchables gain by conversion ? Conversion can 
make no change in the status of the Untouchables. 

(2) All religions are true, all religions are good. To change religion 
is a futility. 

(3) The conversion of the Untouchables is political in its nature. 

(4) The conversion of the Untouchables is not genuine as it is not 
based on faith. 

It cannot take much argument to demonstrate that the objections 
are puerile and inconsequential. 

To take the last objection first. History abounds with cases where 
conversion has taken place without any religious motive. What was the 

1 The Conference was confined to Mahars because the intention was to test the intensity 
of feeling communitywise and to take soundings from each community. 


The typed pages with Sr. Nos. from 279 to 342 have been found in this 
script which is titled as Chapter XX under the heading ‘Away from the 
Hindus’. The whole script consists of 64 pages. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


404 


404 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

nature of its conversion of Clovis and his subjects to Christianity ? 
How did Ethelbert and his Kentish subjects become Christians ? Was 
there a religious motive which led them to accept the new religion ? 
Speaking on the nature of conversions to Christianity that had taken 
place during the middle ages Rev. Reichel says : 1 

“One after another the nations of Europe are converted to the 
faith; their conversion is seen always to proceed from above, never 
from below. Clovis yields to the bishop Remigius and forthwith he 
is followed by the Baptism of 3,000 Franks. Ethelbert yields to the 
mission of Augustine and forthwith all Kent follows his example; 
when his son Eadbald apostatises, the men of Kent apostatise with 
him. Essex is finally won by the conversion of King Sigebert, who 
under the influence of another king, Oswy, allows himself to be 
baptised. Northumberland is temporarily gained by the conversion 
of its king, Edwin, but falls away as soon as Edwin is dead. It anew 
accepts the faith, when another king, Oswald, promotes its diffusion. 

In the conversion of Germany, a bishop, Boniface, plays a prominent 
part, in close connection with the princes of the country, Charles 
Martel and Pepin; the latter, in return for his patronage receiving 
at Soissons the Church’s sanction to a violent act of usurpation. 
Denmark is gained by the conversion of its kings, Herald Krag, 
Herald Blastand and Canute, Sweden by that of the two Olofs; and 
Russian, by the conversion of its sovereign, Vladimir. Everywhere 
Christianity addresses itself first to kings and princes; everywhere 
the bishops and abbots appear as its only representatives. 

Nor was this all, for where a king had once been gained, 
no obstacle by the Mediaeval missionaries to the immediate 
indiscriminate baptism of his subjects. Three thousand warriors of 
Clovis following the example of their king, were at once admitted to 
the sacred rite; the subjects of Ethelbert were baptised in numbers 
after the conversion of their prince, without preparation, and with 
hardly any instruction. The Germans only were less hasty in following 
the example of others. In Russia, so great was the number of those 
who crowded to be baptised after the baptism of Vladimir, that the 
sacrament had to be administered to hundreds at a time.” 

History records cases where conversion has taken place as a result 
of compulsion or deceit. 

Today religion has become a piece of ancestral property. It passes 
from father to son so does inheritance. What genuineness is there in 
such cases of conversion ? The conversion of the Untouchables if it did 
take place would take after full deliberation of the value of religion 

1 The Sea of Rome, pp. 143-45. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


405 


AWAY FROM THE HINDUS 405 

and the virtue of the different religions. How can such a conversion be 
said to be not a genuine conversion ? On the other hand, it would be 
the first case in history of genuine conversion. It is therefore difficult to 
understand why the genuineness of the conversion of the Untouchables 
should be doubted by anybody. 

The third objection is an ill-considered objection. What political gain 
will accrue to the Untouchables from their conversion has been defined 
by nobody. If there is a political gain, nobody has proved that it is a 
direct inducement to conversion. 

The opponents of conversion do not even seem to know that a 
distinction has to be made between a gain being a direct inducement to 
conversion and its being only an incidental advantage. This distinction 
cannot be said to be a distinction without a difference. Conversion may 
result in a political gain to the Untouchables. It is only where a gain is 
a direct inducement that conversion could be condemned as immoral or 
criminal. Unless therefore the opponents of conversion prove that the 
conversion desired by the Untouchables is for political gain and for nothing 
else their accusation is baseless. If political gain is only an incidental 
gain then there is nothing criminal in conversion. The fact, however, 
is that conversion can bring no new political gain to the Untouchables. 
Under the constitutional law of India every religious community has 
got the right to separate political safeguards. The Untouchables in 
their present condition enjoy political rights similar to those which are 
enjoyed by the Muslims and the Christians. If they change their faith 
the change is not to bring into existence political rights which did not 
exist before. If they do not change they will retain the political rights 
which they have. Political gain has no connection with conversion. The 
charge is a wild charge made without understanding. 

The second objection rests on the premise that all religions teach 
the same thing. It is from the premise that a conclusion is drawn that 
since all religions teach the same thing there is no reason to prefer one 
religion to other. It may be conceded that all religions agree in holding 
that the meaning of life is to be found in the pursuit of ‘good’. Up to 
this point the validity of the premise may be conceded. But when the 
premise goes beyond and asserts that because of this there is no reason 
to prefer one religion to another it becomes a false premise. 

Religions may be alike in that they all teach that the meaning of 
life is to be found in the pursuit of ‘good’. But religions are not alike 
in their answers to the question ‘What is good ?’ In this they certainly 
differ. One religion holds that brotherhood is good, another caste and 
untouchability is good. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


406 


406 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

There is another respect in which all religions are not alike. Besides 
being an authority which defines what is good, religion is a motive force 
for the promotion and spread of the ‘good’. Are all religions agreed in 
the means and methods they advocate for the promotion and spread of 
good ? As pointed out by Prof. Tiele 1 , religion is: 

“One of the mightiest motors in the history of mankind, which 
formed as well as tore asunder nations, united as well as divided 
empires, which sanctioned the most atrocious and barbarous deeds, 
the most libinous customs, inspired the most admirable acts of 
heroism, self renunciation, and devotion, which occasioned the most 
sanguinary wars, rebellions and persecutions, as well as brought 
about the freedom, happiness and peace of nations — at one time 
a partisan of tyranny, at another breaking its chains, now calling 
into existence and fostering a new and brilliant civilization, then 
the deadly foe to progress, science and art.” 

Apart from these oscillations there are permanent differences in the 
methods of promoting good as they conceive it. Are there not religions 
which advocate violence ? Are there not religions which advocate 
nonviolence ? Given these facts how can it be said that all religions are 
the same and there is no reason to prefer one to the other. 

In raising the second objection the Hindu is merely trying to avoid an 
examination of Hinduism on its merits. It is an extraordinary thing that 
in the controversy over conversion not a single Hindu has had the courage 
to challenge the Untouchables to say what is wrong with Hinduism. 
The Hindu is merely taking shelter under the attitude generated by 
the science of comparative religion. The science of comparative religion 
has broken down the arrogant claims of all revealed religions that they 
alone are true and all others which are not the results of revelation are 
false. That revelation was too arbitrary, too capricious test to be accepted 
for distinguishing a true religion from a false was undoubtedly a great 
service which the science of comparative religion has rendered to the 
cause of religion. But it must be said to the discredit of that science 
that it has created the general impression that all religions are good 
and there is no use and purpose in discriminating them. 

The first objection is the only objection which is worthy of serious 
consideration. The objection proceeds on the assumption that religion 
is a purely personal matter between man and God. It is supernatural. 
It has nothing to do with social. The argument is no doubt sensible. 
But its foundations are quite false. At any rate, it is a one-sided view 
of religion and that too based on aspects of religion which are purely 
historical and not fundamental. 

1 Quoted by Crowley, ‘Tree of life’, p. 5. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


407 


AWAY FROM THE HINDUS 407 

To understand the function and purposes of religion it is necessary 
to separate religion from theology. The primary things in religion are 
the usages, practices and observances, rites and rituals. Theology is 
secondary. Its object is merely to nationalize them. As stated by Prof. 
Robertson Smith : 1 

“Ritual and practical usages were, strictly speaking the sum 
total of ancient religions. Religion in primitive times was not a 
system of belief with practical applications; it was a body of fixed 
traditional practices, to which every member of society conformed 
as a matter of courage, Men would not be men if they agreed to 
do certain things without having a reason for their action; but in 
ancient religion the reason was not first formulated as a doctrine 
and then expressed in practice, but conversely, practice preceded 
doctrinal theory.” 

Equally necessary it is not to think of religion as though it was 
super-natural. To overlook the fact that the primary content of religion is 
social is to make nonsense of religion. The Savage society was concerned 
with life and the preservation of life and it is these life processes 
which constitute the substance and source of the religion of the Savage 
society. So great was the concern of the Savage society for life and the 
preservation of life that it made them the basis of its religion. So central 
were the life processes in the religion of the Savage society that every 
thing which affected them became part of its religion. The ceremonies 
of the Savage society were not only concerned with the events of birth, 
attaining of manhood, puberty, marriage, sickness, death and war but 
they were also concerned with food. Among the pastoral peoples the flocks 
and herds are sacred. Among agricultural peoples seedtime and harvest 
are marked by ceremonies performed with some reference to the growth 
and the preservation of the crops. Likewise drought, pestilence, and 
other strange irregular phenomena of nature occasion the performance 
of ceremonials. As pointed out by Prof. Crawley, the religion of the 
savage begins and ends with the affirmation and consecration of life. 

In life and preservation of life therefore consists the religion of 
the savage. What is true of the religion of the savage is true of all 
religions wherever they are found for the simple reason that constitutes 
the essence of religion. It is true that in the present day society with 
its theological refinements this essence of religion has become hidden 
from view and is even forgotten. But that life and the preservation of 
life constitute the essence of religion even in the present day society 
is beyond question. This is well illustrated by Prof. Crawley, when 


The Religion of the Semites, p. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


408 


408 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

speaking of the religious life of man in the present day society he 
says how: 

“man’s religion does not enter into his professional or social 
hours, his scientific or artistic moments; practically its chief claims 
are settled on one day in the week from which ordinary worldly 
concerns are excluded. In fact, his life is in two parts; but the 
moiety with which religion is concerned is the elemental. Serious 
thinking on ultimate questions of life and death is, roughly speaking, 
the essence of his Sabbath; add to this the habit of prayer, the 
giving of thanks at meals, and the subconscious feeling that birth 
and death, continuation and marriage are rightly solemnized by 
religion, while business and pleasure may possibly be consecrated, 
but only metaphorically or by an overflow of religious feeling.” 

Students of the origin and history of religion when they began their 
study of the Savage society became so much absorbed in the magic, 
the tabu and totem and the rites and ceremonies connected therewith 
they found in the Savage society that they not only overlooked the 
social processes of the savage as the primary content of religion but 
they failed even to appreciate the proper function of magic and other 
supernatural processes. This was a great mistake and has cost all 
concerned in religion very dearly. For it is responsible for the grave 
misconception about religion* which prevails today among most people. 
Nothing can be a greater error than to explain religion as having 
arisen in magic or being concerned only in magic for magic sake. 
It is true that Savage society practises magic, believes in tabu and 
worships the totem. But it is wrong to suppose that these constitute 
the religion or form the source of religion. To take such a view is 
to elevate what is incidental to the position of the principal. The 
principal thing in the religion of the savage are the elemental facts 
of human existence such as life, death, birth, marriage, etc., magic, 
tabu and totem are not the ends. They are only the means. The end 
is life and the preservation of life. Magic, tabu, etc. are resorted to 
by the Savage society not for their own sake but to conserve life 
and to exercise evil influence from doing harm to life. Why should 
such occasions as harvest and famine be accompanied by religious 
ceremonies ? Why are magic, tabu and totem of such importance to 
the savage ? The only answer is that they all affect the preservation 
of life. The process of life and its preservation form the main purpose. 
Life and preservation of life is the core and centre of the religion of the 
Savage society. That today God has taken the place of magic, does not 
alter the fact that God’s place in religion is only as a means for the 

* The word ‘religion’ inserted here is not in the original MS. — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


409 


AWAY FROM THE HINDUS 409 

conservation of life and that the end of religion is the conservation and 
consecration of social life. 

The point to which it is necessary to draw particular attention and to 
which the foregoing discussion lends full support is that it is an error to 
look upon religion as a matter which is individual, private and personal. 
Indeed as will be seen from what follows, religion becomes a source of 
positive mischief if not danger when it remains individual, private and 
personal. Equally mistaken is the view that religion is the flowering of 
special religious instinct inherent in the nature of the individual. The 
correct view is that religion like language is social for the reason that 
either is essential for social life and the individual has to have it because 
without it he cannot participate in the life of the society. 

If religion is social in the sense that it primarily concerns society, 
it would be natural to ask what is the purpose and function of religion. 
The best statement regarding the purpose of religion which I have come 
across is that of Prof. Charles A Ellwood 1 . According to him: 

“religion projects the essential values of human personality and 
of human society into the universe as a whole. It inevitably arises 
as soon as man tries to take valuing attitude toward his universe, 
no matter how small and mean that universe may appear to him. 
Like all the distinctive things in human, social and mental life, it 
of course, rests upon the higher intellectual powers of man. Man is 
the only religious animal, because through his powers of abstract 
thought and reasoning, he alone is self-conscious in the full sense 
of that term. Hence he alone is able to project his values into the 
universe and finds necessity of so doing. Given, in other words, the 
intellectual powers of man, the mind at once seeks to universalise 
its values as well as its ideas. Just as rationalizing processes give 
man a world of universal ideas, so religious processes give man a 
world of universal values. The religious processes are, indeed, nothing 
but the rationalizing processes at work upon man’s impulses and 
emotions rather than upon his precepts. What the reason does for 
ideas, religion does, then, for the feelings. It universalizes them; 
and in universalizing them, it brings them into harmony with the 
whole of reality.” 

Religion emphasizes, universalizes social values and brings them 
to the mind of the individual who is required to recognize them in all 
his acts in order that he may function as an approved member of the 
society. But the purpose of religion is more than this. It spiritualizes 
them. As pointed out by Prof. Ellwood : 2 

1 “The Religious Reconstruction”, pp. 39-40. 

2 Ibid.., pp. 45-46. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


410 


410 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“Now these mental and social values, with which religion 
deals, men call ‘spiritual’. It is something which emphasizes as we 
may say, spiritual values, that is, the values connected especially 
with the personal and social life. It projects these values, as we 
have seen, into the universal reality. It gives man a social and 
moral conception of the universe, rather than a merely mechanical 
one as a theatre of the play of blind, purposeless forces. While 
religion is not primarily animistic philosophy, as has often 
been said, nevertheless it does project mind, spirit, life, into all 
things. Even the most primitive religion did this; for in ‘primitive 
dynamism’ there was a feeling of the psychic, in such concepts 
as mana or manitou. They were closely connected with persons 
and proceeded from person, or things which were viewed in an 
essentially personal way. Religion, therefore, is a belief in the 
reality of spiritual values, and projects them, as we have said, 
into the whole universe. All religion — even so-called atheistic 
religions — emphasizes the spiritual, believes in its dominance, 
and looks to its ultimate triumph.” 

The function of religion in society is equally clear. According to 
Prof. Ellwood 1 the function of religion: 

“is to act as an agency of social control, that is, of the group 
controlling the life of the individual, for what is believed to be 
the good of the larger life of the group. Very early, as we have 
seen, any beliefs and practices which gave expression to personal 
feelings or values of which the group did not approve were branded 
as ‘black magic’ or baleful superstitions; and if this had not been 
done it is evident that the unity of the life of the group might 
have become seriously impaired. Thus the almost necessarily 
social character of religion stands revealed. We cannot have such 
a thing as purely personal or individual religion which is not at 
the same time social. For we live a social life and the welfare of 
the group is, after all. the chief matter of concern.” 

Dealing with the same question in another place, he says 2 : 

“the function of religion is the same as the function of Law and 
Government. It is a means by which society exercises its control 
over the conduct of the individual in order to maintain the social 
order. It may not be used consciously as a method of social control 
over the individual. Nonetheless the fact is that religion acts as a 
means of social control. As compared to religion, Government and 
Law are relatively inadequate means of social control. The control 
through law and order does not go deep enough to secure the 

1 “The Religious Reconstruction”, pp. 42-43. 

2 “Society in its Psychological aspects” (1913), pp. 356-57. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


411 


AWAY FROM THE HINDUS 411 

stability of the social order. The religious sanction, on account 
of its being supernatural has been on the other hand the most 
effective means of social control, far more effective than law and 
Government have been or can be. Without the support of religion, 
law and Government are bound to remain a very inadequate means 
of social control. Religion is the most powerful force of social 
gravitation without which it would be impossible to hold the social 
order in its orbit.” 

The foregoing discussion, although it was undertaken to show that 
religion is a social fact, that religion has a specific social purpose and 
a definite social function it was intended to prove that it was only 
proper that a person if he was required to accept a religion should have 
the right to ask how well it has served the purposes which belong to 
religion. This is the reason why Lord Balfour was justified in putting 
some very straight-questions to the positivists before he could accept 
Positivism to be superior to Christianity. He asked in quite trenchent 
language. 

“what has (positivism) to say to the more obscure multitude who 
are absorbed, and well nigh overwhelmed, in the constant struggle 
with daily needs and narrow cares; who have but little leisure or 
inclination to consider the precise role they are called on to play 
in the great drama of ‘humanity’ and who might in any case be 
puzzled to discover its interest or its importance ? Can it assure 
them that there is no human being so insignificant as not to be 
of infinite worth in the eyes of Him who created the Heavens, or 
so feeble but that his action may have consequences of infinite 
moment long after this material system shall have crumbled into 
nothingness ? Does it offer consolation to those who are bereaved, 
strength to the weak, forgiveness to the sinful, rest to those who 
are weary and heavy laden ?” 

The Untouchables can very well ask the protagonists of Hinduism 
the very questions which Lord Balfour asked the Positivists. Nay 
the Untouchables can ask many more. They can ask: Does Hinduism 
recognize their worth as human beings ? Does it stand for their equality ? 
Does it extend to them the benefit of liberty ? Does it at least help 
to forge the bond of fraternity between them and the Hindus ? Does 
it teach the Hindus that the Untouchables are their kindred ? Does 
it say to the Hindus it is a sin to treat the Untouchables as being 
neither man nor beast ? Does it tell the Hindus to be righteous to the 
Untouchables ? Does it preach to the Hindus to be just and humane to 
them ? Does it inculcate upon the Hindus the virtue of being friendly to 
them ? Does it tell the Hindus to love them, to respect them and to do 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


412 


412 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

them no wrong. In fine, does Hinduism universalize the value of 
life without distinction ? 

No Hindu can dare to give an affirmative answer to any of these 
questions ? On the contrary the wrongs to which the Untouchables 
are subjected by the Hindus are acts which are sanctioned by the 
Hindu religion. They are done in the name of Hinduism and are 
justified in the name of Hinduism. The spirit and tradition which 
makes lawful the lawlessness of the Hindus towards the Untouchables 
is founded and supported by the teachings of Hinduism. How can 
the Hindus ask the Untouchables accept Hinduism and stay in 
Hinduism ? Why should the Untouchables adhere to Hinduism which 
is solely responsible for their degradation ? How can the Untouchables 
stay in Hinduism ? Untouchability is the lowest depth to which the 
degradation of a human being can be carried. To be poor is bad but 
not so bad as to be an Untouchable. The poor can be proud. The 
Untouchable cannot be. To be reckoned low is bad but it is not so 
bad as to be an Untouchable. The low can rise above his status. An 
Untouchable cannot. To be suffering is bad but not so bad as to be 
an Untouchable. They shall some day be comforted. An Untouchable 
cannot hope for this. To have to be meek is bad but it is not so bad 
as to be an Untouchable. The meek if they do not inherit the earth 
may at least be strong. The Untouchables cannot hope for that. 

In Hinduism there is no hope for the Untouchables. But this is 
not the only reason why the Untouchables wish to quit Hinduism. 
There is another reason which makes it imperative for them to 
quit Hinduism. Untouchability is a part of Hinduism. Even those 
who for the sake of posing as enlightened reformers deny that 
untouchability is part of Hinduism are to observe untouchability. 
For a Hindu to believe in Hinduism does not matter. It enhances 
his sense of superiority by the reason of this consciousness that 
there are millions of Untouchables below him. But what does it 
mean for an Untouchable to say that he believes in Hinduism ? It 
means that he accepts that he is an Untouchable and that he is 
an Untouchable is the result of Divine dispensation. For Hinduism 
is divine dispensation. An Untouchable may not cut the throat of 
a Hindu. But he cannot be expected to give an admission that he 
is an Untouchable and rightly so. Which Untouchable is there with 
soul so dead as to give such an admission by adhering to Hinduism. 
That Hinduism is inconsistent with the self-respect and honour of the 
Untouchables is the strongest ground which justifies the conversion 
of the Untouchables to another and nobler faith. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


413 


AWAY FROM THE HINDUS 413 

The opponents of conversion are determined not to be satisfied even 
if the logic of conversion was irrefutable. They will insist upon asking 
further questions. There is one question which they are always eager 
to ask largely because they think it is formidable and unanswerable; 
what will the Untouchables gain materially by changing their faith ? 
The question is not at all formidable. It is simple to answer. It is not 
the intention of the Untouchables to make conversion an opportunity 
for economic gain. The Untouchables it is true will not gain wealth by 
conversion. This is however no loss because while they remain as Hindus 
they are doomed to be poor. Politically the Untouchables will lose the 
political rights that are given to the Untouchables. This is, however, no 
real loss. Because they will be entitled to the benefit of the political rights 
reserved for the community which they would join through conversion. 
Politically there is neither gain nor loss. Socially, the Untouchables will 
gain absolutely and immensely because by conversion the Untouchables 
will be members of a community whose religion has universalized and 
equalized all values of life. Such a blessing is unthinkable for them while 
they are in the Hindu fold. The answer is complete. But by reason of its 
brevity it is not likely to give satisfaction to the opponents of conversion. 
The Untouchables need three things. First thing they need is to end their 
social isolation. The second thing they need is to end their inferiority 
complex. Will conversion meet their needs ? The opponents of conversion 
have a feeling that the supporters of conversion have no case. That is 
why they keep on raising questions. The case in favour of conversion 
is stronger than the strongest case. Only one does wish to spend long 
arguments to prove what is so obvious. But since it is necessary to put 
an end to all doubt, I am prepared to pursue the matter. Let me take 
each point separately. 

How can they end their social isolation ? The one and the only way 
to end their social isolation is for the Untouchables to establish kinship 
with and get themselves incorporated into another community which is 
free from the spirit of caste. The answer is quite simple and yet not many 
will readily accept its validity. The reason is, very few people realize the 
value and significance of kinship. Nevertheless its value and significance 
are very great. Kinship and what it implies has been described by Prof. 
Robertson Smith in the following terms 1 : 

“A kin was a group of persons whose lives were so bound up 
together, in what must be called a physical unity, that they could 
be treated as parts of one common life. The members of one kindred 
looked on themselves as one living whole, a single animated mass of 

1 “Religion of the Semites”, p. 273. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


414 


414 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

blood, flesh and bones, of which no member could be touched 
without all the members suffering.” 

The matter can be looked at from the point of view both of the 
individual as well as from that of the group. From the point of the 
group, kinship calls for a feeling that one is first and foremost a 
member of the group and not merely an individual. From the point 
of view of the individual, the advantages of his kinship with the 
group are no less and no different than those which accrue to a 
member of the family by reason of his membership of the family. 
Family life is characterized by parental tenderness. As pointed out 
by Prof. McDougall 1 : 

“From this emotion (parental tenderness) and its impulse to 
cherish and protect, spring generosity, gratitude, love, pity, true 
benevolence, and altruistic conduct of every kind; in it they have 
their main and absolutely essential root, without which they would 
not be.” 

Community as distinguished from society is only an enlarged 
family. As such it is characterised by all the virtues which are found 
in a family and which have been so well described by Prof. McDougall. 
Inside the community there is no discrimination among those who are 
recognized as kindred bound by kinship. The community recognizes 
that every one within it is entitled to all the rights equally with 
others. As Professors Dewey and Tufts have pointed out : 

“A State may allow a citizen of another country to own land, 
to sue in its courts, and will usually give him a certain amount of 
protection, but the first-named rights are apt to be limited, and it 
is only a few years since Chief Justice Taney’s dictum stated the 
existing legal theory of the United States to be that the Negro 
‘had no rights which the white man was bound to respect’. Even 
where legal theory does not recognize race or other distinctions, 
it is often hard in practice for an alien to get justice. In primitive 
clan or family groups this principle is in full force. Justice is a 
privilege which falls to a man as belonging to some group — not 
otherwise. The member of the clan or the household or the village 
community has a claim, but the Stranger has nothing standing. It 
may be treated kindly, as a guest, but he cannot demand ‘justice’ 
at the hands of any group but his own. In this conception of rights 
within the group we have the prototype of modern civil law. The 
dealing of clan with clan is a matter of war or negotiation, not of 
law; and the clanless man is an ‘outlaw’ in fact as well as in name.” 

1 “Introduction to Social Psychology”, p. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


415 


AWAY FROM THE HINDUS 415 

Kinship makes the community take responsibility for vindicating the 
wrong done to a member. Blood-flood which objectively appears to be a 
savage method of avenging a wrong done to a member is subjectively 
speaking a manifestation of sympathetic resentment by the members 
of the community for a wrong done to their fellow. This sympathetic 
resentment is a compound of tender emotion and anger such as those 
which issue out of parental tenderness when it comes face to face with 
a wrong done to a child. It is kinship which generates, this sympathetic 
resentment, this compound of tender emotion and anger. This is by no 
means a small value to an individual. In the words of Prof. McDougall : 

“This intimate alliance between tender emotion and anger 
is of great importance for the social life of man, and the right 
understanding of it is fundamental for a true theory of the moral 
sentiments; for the anger evoked in this way is the germ of all moral 
indignation and on moral indignation justice and the greater part 
of public law are in the main founded.” 

It is kinship which generates generosity and invokes its moral 
indignation which is necessary to redress a wrong. Kinship is the will 
to enlist the support of the kindred community to meet the tyrannies 
and oppressions by the Hindus which today the Untouchables have to 
bear single-handed and alone. Kinship with another community is the 
best insurance which the Untouchable can effect against Hindu tyranny 
and Hindu oppression. 

Anyone who takes into account the foregoing exposition of what kinship 
means and does, should have no difficulty in accepting the proposition 
that to end their isolation the Untouchables must join another community 
which does not recognise caste. 

Kinship is the antithesis of isolation. For the Untouchables to establish 
kinship with another community is merely another name for ending their 
present state of isolation. Their isolation will never end so long as they 
remain Hindus. As Hindus, their isolation hits them from front as well 
as from behind. Notwithstanding their being Hindus, they are isolated 
from the Muslims and the Christians because as Hindus they are aliens 
to all — Hindus as well as Non-Hindus. This isolation can end only in 
one way and in no other way. That way is for the Untouchables to join 
some non-Hindu community and thereby become its kith and kin. 

That this is not a meaningless move will be admitted by all 
those who know the disadvantages of isolation and the advantages 
of kinship. What are the consequences of isolation ? Isolation means 
social segregation, social humiliation, social discrimination and social 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


416 


416 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

injustice. Isolation means denial of protection, denial of justice, denial 
of opportunity. Isolation means want of sympathy, want of fellowship 
and want of consideration. Nay, isolation means positive hatred and 
antipathy from the Hindus. By having kinship with other community 
on the other hand, the Untouchables will have within that community 
equal position, equal protection and equal justice, will be able to draw 
upon its sympathy, its good-will. 

This I venture to say is a complete answer to the question raised by 
the opponents. It shows what the Untouchables can gain by conversion. 
It is however desirable to carry the matter further and dispose of another 
question which has not been raised so far by the opponents of conversion 
but may be raised. The question is : why is conversion necessary to 
establish kinship ? 

The answer to this question will reveal itself if it is borne in mind 
that there is a difference between a community and a society and between 
kinship and citizenship. 

A community in the strict sense of the word is a body of kindred. 
A society is a collection of many communities or of different bodies of 
kindreds. The bond which holds a community together is called kinship 
while the bond which holds a society together is called citizenship. 

The means of acquiring citizenship in a society are quite different 
from the means of acquiring kinship in a community. Citizenship is 
acquired by what is called naturalization. The condition precedent for 
citizenship is the acceptance of political allegiance to the State. The 
conditions precedent for acquiring kinship are quite different. At one 
stage in evolution of man the condition precedent for adoption into the 
kindred was unity of blood. For the kindred is a body of persons who 
conceive themselves as spring from one ancestor and as having in their 
veins one blood. It does not matter whether each group has actually and 
in fact spring from a single ancestor. As a matter of fact, a group did 
admit a stranger into the kindred though he did not spring from the 
same ancestor. It is interesting to note that there was a rule that if a 
stranger intermarried with a group for seven generations, he became a 
member of the kindred. The point is that, fiction though it be, admission 
into the kindred required as a condition precedent unity of blood. 

At a later stage of Man’s Evolution, common religion in place 
of unity of blood became a condition precedent to kinship. In this 
connection it is necessary to bear in mind the important fact pointed 
out by Prof. Robertson Smith 1 that in a community the social body is 

1 The Religion of the Semites. Lecture II. Prof. Smith makes this distinction as though 
it was a distinction between ancient society and modern society. It is of wider importance. 
In reality, it is a distinction which marks off a community from a society. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


417 


AWAY FROM THE HINDUS 417 

made not of men only, but of gods and men and therefore any stranger 
who wants to enter a community and forge the bond of kinship can do 
so only by accepting the God or Gods of the community. The Statement 
in the Old Testament such as those of Naomi to Ruth saying : “Thy 
sister is gone back into her people and unto her gods” and Ruth’s reply 
“Thy people shall be my people, and thy God my God” or the calling of 
the Mobites the sons and daughters of Chemosh are all evidences which 
show that the bond of kinship in a community is the consequence of 
their allegiance to a common religion. Without common religion there 
can be no kinship. 

Where people are waiting to find faults in the argument in favour 
of conversion it is better to leave no ground for fault-finders to create 
doubt or misunderstanding. It might therefore be well to explain how 
and in what manner religion is able to forge the bond of kinship. The 
answer is simple. It does it through eating and drinking together . 1 The 
Hindus in defending their caste system ridicule the plea for inter-dining. 
They ask : What is there in inter-dining ? The answer from a sociological 
point of view is that is everything in it. Kinship is a social covenant of 
brotherhood. Like all convenants it required to be signed, sealed and 
delivered before it can become binding. The mode of signing, sealing 
and delivery is the mode prescribed by religion and that mode is the 
participation in a sacrificial meal. As said by Prof. Smith 2 : 

“What is the ultimate nature of the fellowship which is constituted 
or declared when men eat and drink together ? In our complicated 
society fellowship has many types and many degrees; men may be 
united by bonds of duty and honour for certain purposes, and stand 
quite apart in all other things. Even in ancient times — for example, 
in the Old Testament — we find the sacrament of a common meal 
introduced to seal engagements of various kinds. But in every case 
the engagement is absolute and inviolable; it constitutes what in 
the language of ethics is called a duty of perfect obligation. Now 
in the most primitive society there is only one kind of fellowship 
which is absolute and inviolable. To the primitive man all other, men 
fall under two classes, those to whom his life is sacred and those 
to whom it is not sacred. The former are his fellows; the latter are 
strangers and potential foemen, with whom it is absurd to think 
of forming any inviolable tie unless they are first brought into the 
circle within which each man’s life is sacred to all his comrades.” 

If for the Untouchables mere citizenship is not enough to put an end 
to their isolation and the troubles which ensue therefrom, if kinship is 


On this subject see Smith, The Religion of the Semites, pp. 270-71. 2 Ibid., pp. 271-72. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


418 


418 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the only cure then there is no other way except to embrace the religion 
of the community whose kinship they seek. 

The argument so far advanced was directed to show how conversion 
can end the problem of the isolation of the Untouchables. There remain 
two other questions to be considered. One is, will conversion remove 
their inferiority complex ? One cannot of course dogmatize. But one can 
have no hesitation in answering the question in the affirmative. The 
inferiority complex of the Untouchables is the result of their isolation, 
discrimination and the unfriendliness of the social environment. It is 
these which have created a feeling of helplessness which are responsible 
for the inferiority complex which cost him the power of self-assertion. 

Can religion alter this psychology of the Untouchables ? The 
psychologists are of opinion that religion can effect this cure provided 
it is a religion of the right type; provided that the religion approaches 
the individual not as a degraded worthless outcastes but as a fellow 
human being; provided religion gives him an atmosphere in which he 
will find that there are possibilities for feeling himself the equal of 
every other human being there is no reason why conversion to such a 
religion by the Untouchables should not remove their age-long pessimism 
which is responsible for their inferiority complex. As pointed out by 
Prof. Ellwood : ' 

“Religion is primarily a valuing attitude, universalizing the will 
and the emotions, rather than the ideas of man. It thus harmonizes 
men, on the side of will and emotion, with his world. Hence, it is 
the fee of pessimism and despair. It encourages hope, and gives 
confidence in the battle of life, to the savage as well as to the 
civilized man. It does so, as we have said, because it braces vital 
feeling; and psychologists tell us that the reason why it braces 
vital feeling is because it is an adaptive process in which all of the 
lower centres of life are brought to reinforce the higher centres. 

The universalization of values means, in other words, in psycho- 
physical terms, that the lower nerve centres pour their energies 
into the higher nerve centres, thus harmonizing and bringing to a 
maximum of vital efficiency life on its inner side. It is thus that 
religion taps new levels of energy, for meeting the crisis of life, 
while at the same time it brings about a deeper harmony between 
the inner and the outer.” 

Will conversion raise the general social status of the Untouchables ? 
It is difficult to see how there can be two opinions on this question. 

The oft-quoted answer given by Shakespeare to the question what is 
1 The Reconstruction of Religion, pp. 40-41. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


419 


AWAY FROM THE HINDUS 419 

in a name hardly shows sufficient understanding of the problem of a 
name. A rose called by another name would smell as sweet would be 
true if names served no purpose and if people instead of depending 
upon names took the trouble of examining each case and formed their 
opinions and attitudes about it on the basis of their examination. 
Unfortunately, names serve a very important purpose. They play a 
great part in social economy. Names are symbols. Each name represents 
association of certain ideas and notions about a certain object. It is a 
label. From the label people know what it is. It saves them the trouble 
of examining each case individually and determine for themselves 
whether the ideas and notions commonly associated with the object 
are true. People in society have to deal with so many objects that it 
would be impossible for them to examine each case. They must go 
by the name that is why all advertisers are keen in finding a good 
name. If the name is not attractive the article does not go down with 
the people. 

The name ‘Untouchable’ is a bad name. It repels, forbids, and 
stinks. The social attitude of the Hindu towards the Untouchable is 
determined by the very name ‘Untouchable’. There is a fixed attitude 
towards ‘Untouchables’ which is determined by the stink which is 
imbedded in the name ‘Untouchable’. People have no mind to go into 
the individual merits of each Untouchable no matter how meritorious 
he is. All untouchables realize this. There is a general attempt to 
call themselves by some name other than the ‘Untouchables’. The 
Chamars call themselves Ravidas or Jatavas. The Dorns call themselves 
Shilpakars. The Pariahs call themselves Adi-Dravidas, the Madigas call 
themselves Arundhatyas, the Mahars call themselves Chokhamela or 
Somavamshi and the Bhangis call themselves Balmikis. All of them if 
away from their localities would call themselves Christians. 

The Untouchables know that if they call themselves Untouchables 
they will at once draw the Hindu out and expose themselves to his 
wrath and his prejudice. That is why they give themselves other 
names which may be likened to the process of undergoing protective 
discolouration. 

It is not seldom that this discolouration completely fails to serve 
its purpose. For to be a Hindu is for Hindus not an ultimate social 
category. The ultimate social category is caste, nay sub-caste if there 
is a sub-caste. When the Hindus meet ‘May I know who are you’ is 
a question sure to be asked. To this question ‘I am a Hindu’ will not 
be a satisfactory answer. It will certainly not be accepted as a final 
answer. The inquiry is bound to be further pursued. The answer 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


420 


420 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

‘Hindu’ is bound to be followed by another; ‘What caste ?’. The answer 
to that is bound to be followed by question : “What sub-caste ?” It 
is only when the questioner reaches the ultimate social category 
which is either caste or sub-caste that he will stop his questionings. 

The Untouchable who adopts the new name is a protective 
discolouration finds that the new name does not help and that in the 
course of relentless questionings he is, so to say, run down to earth 
and made to disclose that he is an Untouchable. The concealment 
makes him the victim of greater anger than his original voluntary 
disclosure would have done. 

From this discussion two things are clear. One is that the low 
status of the Untouchables is bound upon with a stinking name. 
Unless the name is changed there is no possibility of a rise in their 
social status. The other is that a change of name within Hinduism 
will not do. The Hindu will not fail to penetrate through such a name 
and make the Untouchable and confer himself as an Untouchable. 

The name matters and matters a great deal. For, the name can 
make a revolution in the status of the Untouchables. But the name 
must be the name of a community outside Hinduism and beyond its 
power of spoliation and degradation. Such name can be the property 
of the Untouchable only if they undergo religious conversion. A 
conversion by change of name within Hinduism is a clandestine 
conversion which can be of no avail. 

This discussion on conversion may appear to be somewhat 
airy. It is bound to be so. It cannot become material unless it is 
known which religion the Untouchables choose to accept. For what 
particular advantage would flow from conversion would depend upon 
the religion selected and the social position of the followers of that 
religion. One religion may give them all the three benefits, another 
only two and a third may result in conferring upon them only one 
of the advantages of conversion. What religion the Untouchables 
should choose is not the subject matter of this Chapter. The subject 
matter of this Chapter is whether conversion can solve the problem 
of untouchability. The answer to that qustion is emphatically in 
the affirmative. 

The force of the argument, of course, rests on a view of religion 
which is somewhat different from the ordinary view according to 
which religion is concerned with man’s relation to God and all that 
it means. According to this view, religion exists not for the saving of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


421 


AWAY FROM THE HINDUS 421 

souls but for the preservation of society and the welfare of the individual. 
It is only those who accept the former view of religion that find it difficult 
to understand how conversion can solve the problem of untouchability. 
Those who accept the view of religion adopted in this Chapter will have 
no difficulty in accepting the soundness of the conclusion. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


422 


Chapter 28 

CASTE AND CONVERSION 1 


The instinct of self-preservation is responsible for the present upheaval 
in the Hindu Community. There was a time when the elite of the society 
had no fear about its preservation. Their argument was that the Hindu 
community was one of the oldest communities that has withstood the 
onslaught of many adverse forces and therefore there must be some 
native strength and stamina in its culture and civilization as to make it 
survive. They were therefore firm in their belief that their community was 
destined ever to survive. Recent events seem to have shaken this belief. 
In the Hindu-Muslim riots that have taken place all over the country in 
recent times it has been found that a small band of Muslims can beat 
the Hindus and beat them badly. The elite of the Hindus are therefore 
reflecting afresh upon the question whether such a kind of survival in 
the struggle for existence is of any value. The proud Hindu who always 
harped upon the fact of survival as a proof of his fitness to survive never 
stopped to think that survival was of many types and not all are of equal 
value. One can survive by marching against the enemy and conquering 
him. Or one can survive by beating a retreat and hiding oneself in a 
position of safety. In either case there would be survival. But certainly 
the value of the two survivals is measures apart. What is important is 
not the fact of survival but the plane of survival ? Survive the Hindus 
may, but whether as free men or slaves is the issue. But the matter 
seems so hopeless that granting that they manage to survive as slaves it 
does not seem to be altogether certain that they can survive as Hindus. 
For they are not only beaten by the Muslims in the physical struggle but 
they seem also to be beaten in the cultural struggle. There is in recent 
days a regular campaign conducted vigorously by the Muslims for the 
spread of Islamic culture, and by their conversion movement, it is alleged, 
they have made vast additions to their numerical strength by winning 
over members of the Hindu faith. Fortunately for the Muslims there is 
a large mass of non-descript population numbering about seven crores 
which is classed as Hindus but which has no particular affinity to the 

1 Originally published in the ‘Telugu Samachar Special Number’, Nov. 1926. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


423 


CASTE AND CONVERSION 423 

Hindu faith and whose position is made so intolerable by that faith 
that they can be easily induced to embrace Islam. Some of these are 
going over to Islam and yet more may go. 

This is sufficient to cause alarm among the elite of the Hindus. 
If with a superiority of numbers the Hindus are unable to face the 
Muslims what would be their fate if their following was depleted by 
conversions to Islam ? The Hindus feel that they must save their 
people from being lost to them and their culture. Herein lies the 
origin of the Shudhi Movement or the movement to reclaim people 
to the Hindu faith. 

Some people of the orthodox type are opposed to this movement 
on the ground that Hindu religion was never a proselytising religion 
and that Hindu must be so by birth. There is something to be said 
in favour of this view. From the commencement of time to which 
memory or tradition can reach back, proselytism has never been 
the practising creed of the Hindu faith. Prof. Max Muller, the great 
German Savant and Oriental Scholar in an address delivered by him 
in the name of the Westminster Abbey on the 3rd of December 1873 
Day of Intercession for Missions, emphatically declared that the Hindu 
Religion was a non-missionary religion. The orthodoxy which refuses to 
believe in expediency may therefore feel well grounded in its opposition 
to Shudhi, as a practice directly opposed to the most fundamental 
tenets of the Hindu faith. But there are other authorities of equally 
good repute to support the promoters of the Shudhi movement, for 
it is their opinion that the Hindu Religion has been and can be a 
missionary religion. Prof. Jolly in an article ‘ DIE AUSBREITUNG 
DER INDISCHEN FULTUR’, gives a graphic description of the means 
and methods adopted by the ancient Hindu Rulers and Priests to 
spread the Hindu Religion among the aborigines of the country. The 
late Sir Alfred Lyall who wrote in reply to Prof. Max Muller also 
sought to prove that the Hindu religion was a missionary religion. 
The probability of the case seems to be definitely in favour of Jolly 
and Lyall. For unless we suppose that the Hindu Religion did in some 
degree do the work of proselytization, it is not possible to account 
for its spread over a vast continent and inhabited by diverse races 
which were in possession of a distinct culture of their own. Besides, 
the prevalence of certain YAJNAS and YAGAS cannot be explained 
except on the hypothesis that there were ceremonies for the Shudhi 
of the Vratya. We may therefore safely conclude that in ancient 
times the Hindu religion was a missionary religion. But that owing 
to some reason it ceased to be so long back in its historical course. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


424 


424 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The question that I wish to consider is why did the Hindu religion 
cease to be a missionary religion. There may be various explanations 
for this, and I propose to offer my own explanation for what it is worth. 
Aristotle has said that man is a social being. Whatever be the cogency 
of the, reasons of Aristotle in support of his statement this much is true 
that it is impossible for any one to begin life as an individualist in the 
sense of radically separating himself from his social fellows. The social 
bond is established and rooted in the very growth of self-consciousness. 
Each individual’s apprehension of his own personal self and its interest 
involves the recognition of others and their interests; and his pursuit 
of one type of purposes, generous or selfish, is in so far the pursuit of 
the other also. The social relation is in all cases intrinsic to the life, 
interests, and purposes of the individual; he feels and apprehends, the 
vitality of social relations in all the situations of his life. In short, life 
without society is no more possible for him than it is for a fish out of 
water. 

Given this fact it follows that before a society can make converts, 
it must see to it that its constitution provides for aliens being made its 
members and allowed to participate in its social life. It must be used 
to make no difference between individuals born in it and individuals 
brought into it. It must be open to receive him in the one case as in the 
other and allow him to enter into its life and thus make it possible for 
him to live and thrive as a member of that society. If there is no such 
provision on conversion of an alien the question would at once arise 
where to place the convert. If there is no place for the convert there 
can be no invitation for conversion nor can there be an acceptance of it. 

Is there any place in the Hindu society for a convert to the Hindu 
faith ? Now the organisation of the Hindu society is characterized 
by the existence bf castes. Each caste is endogamous and lives by 
antogony. In other words it only allows individuals born in it to its 
membership and does not allow any one from outside being brought 
into it. The Hindu Society being a federation of castes and each caste 
being self-enclosed there is no place for the convert for no caste will 
admit him : The answer to the question why the Hindu Religion ceased 
to be a missionary religion is to be found in the fact that it developed 
the caste system. Caste is incompatible with conversion. So long as 
mass conversion was possible, the Hindu Society could convert for the 
converts were large enough to form a new caste which could provide 
the elements of a social life from among themselves. But when mass 
conversion’s were no more and only individual converts could be had, 
the Hindu Religion had necessarily to cease to be missionary for its 
social organisation could make no room for the incoming convert. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


425 


CASTE AND CONVERSION 425 

I have not propounded this question as to why the Hindu Religion 
ceased to be missionary simply to find an opportunity for obtaining 
credit for originality of thought by offering a novel explanation. I have 
propounded the question and given an answer to it because I feel that 
both have a very important bearing upon the Shudhi movement. Much 
as I sympathise with the promoters of that movement, I must say that 
they have not analysed the difficulties in the way of the success of their 
movement. The motive behind the Shudhi movement is to increase the 
strength of the Hindu Society by increasing its numbers. Now a society 
is strong not because its numbers are great but because it is solid in its 
mass. Instances are not wanting where a solid organised band of fanatics 
have routed a large army of disorganised crusaders; Even in the Hindu- 
Muslim riots it has been proved that the Hindus are beaten not only 
where they are weak in numbers, but they are beaten by the Muslims 
even where the Hindus preponderate. The case of Moplahs is in point. 
This alone ought to show that the Hindus suffer not from want of numbers 
but from want of solidarity. To increase solidarity of the Hindu Society 
one must tackle the forces which have brought about its disintegration. 
My fear is that mere Shudhi, instead of integrating the Hindu Society, 
will cause greater disintegration and will annoy the Muslim Community 
without any gain to the Hindus. In a society composed of castes, Shudhi 
brings in a person who can find no home and who is therefore bound to 
lead an isolated and separate existence with no attachment or loyalty 
to any one in particular. Even if Shudhi were to bring into the Hindu 
fold a mass like the Malkana catch of Shradhanand, it will only add 
one more caste to the existing number. Now the greater the castes the 
greater the isolation and the greater the weakness of the Hindu society. 
If the Hindu society desires to survive it must think not of adding to its 
numbers but increasing its solidarity and that means the abolition of 
caste. The abolition of castes is the real Sanghatan of the Hindus and 
when Sanghatan is achieved by the abolishing of castes, Shudhi will be 
unnecessary and if practised, will be gainful of real strength. With the 
castes in existence, it is impossible and if practised would be harmful 
to the real Sanghatan and solidarity of the Hindus. But somehow the 
most revolutionary and ardent reformer of the Hindu society shies at 
the idea of abolition of the caste and advocates such puerile measures 
as the reconversion of the converted Hindu, the changing of the diet and 
the starting of Akhadas. Some day it will dawn upon the Hindus that 
they cannot save their society and also preserve their caste. It is to be 
hoped that that day is not far off. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


426 


Chapter 29 

CHRISTIANIZING THE 
UNTOUCHABLES 

I. Growth of Christianity in India. II. Time and money spent 
in Missionary effort. III. Reasons for slow growth. 

I 

How old is Christianity in India ? What progress has it made among 
the people of India ? These are questions which no one who is interested 
in the Untouchables can fail to ask. The two questions are so intimately 
connected that the endeavour for the spread of Christianity would be 
hopeless if there were not in India that vast body of untouchables who, 
by their peculiar circumstances, are most ready to respond to the social 
message of Christianity. 

The following figures will give some idea of the population of Indian 
Christians as compared with other communities in India according to 
the Census of 1931. 


INDIA AND BURMA 


Population by 
Religion 

1891 Census 

1921 Census 

1931 Census 

Increase# 
Decrease — 

Hindu 


216,734,586 

239,195,140 

#10.4 

Muslims 


68,735,233 

77,677,545 

#13 

Buddhist 


11,571,268 

12,786,806 

#10.5 

Sikh 


3,238,803 

4,335,771 

#33.9 

Primitive Religions 


9,774,611 

8,280,347 

— 15.3 

Christian 


4,754,064 

6,296,763 

#32.5 

Jain 


1,178,596 

1,252,105 

# 6.2 

Zoroastrian 


101,778 

109,752 

# 7.8 

Jews 


21,778 

24,141 

#10.9 

Unreturned 


18,004 

2,860,187 



Total . . 

316,128,721 

352,818,557 

#10.6 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


427 


CHRISTIANIZING THE UNTOUCHABLES 427 

It is true that during the 1921 and 1931 Christianity has shown a 
great increase. From the point of growth Sikhism takes the first place. 
Christianity comes second and Islam another proselytizing religion comes 
third. The difference between the first and the second is so small that 
the second place occupied by Christianity may be taken to be as good 
as first. Again the difference between the second and the third place 
occupied by Islam is so enormous that Christians may well be proud of 
their having greatly outdistanced so serious a rival. 

With all this the fact remains that this figure of 6,296,763 is out 
of a total of 352,818,557. This means that the Christian population in 
India is about 1.7 p.c. of the total. 

II 

In how many years and after what expenditure ? As to expenditure 
it is not possible to give any accurate figures. Mr. George Smith in his 
book on “The Conversion of India” published in 1893 gives statistics which 
serve to give some idea of the resources spent by Christian Nations for 
Missionary work in heathen countries. This is what he says : 

“We do not take into account their efforts, vigorous and necessary, 
especially in the lands of Asia and North Africa occupied by the 
Eastern Churches for whom Americans do much, nor any labours 
for Christians by Christians of a purer faith and life. Leaving out 
of account also the many wives of missionaries who are represented 
statistically in their husbands, Rev. J. Vahl, President of the Danish 
Missionary Society, gives us these results. We accept them as the 
most accurately compiled, and as almost too cautiously estimated 
where estimate is unavoidable. In Turkey and Egypt only work 
among the Musalmans is reckoned. 



1890 

1891 

Income (English Money) 

£2,412,938 

£2,749,340 

Missionaries 

4,652 

5,094 

Missionaries unmarried ladies 

2,118 

2,445 

Native Ministers 

3,424 

3,730 

Other Native helpers 

36,405 

40,438 

Communicants 

966,856 

1,168,560 


We abstain from estimating in detail the results for 1892, as they 
are about to appear, and still less for the year 1893, but experts can 
do this for themselves. This only we would say, that the number of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


428 


428 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

native communicants added in those two years has been very large, 
especially in India. Allowing for that, we should place them now at 
1,300,000 which gives a native Christian community of 5,200,000 
gathered out of all non-Catholic lands. 

Dean Vahl’s statistics are drawn from the reports of 304 mission 
societies and agencies in 1891, beginning with Cromwell’s New 
England Company, for America, in 1649. On the following page 
the details are summarised from seventeen lands of Reformed 
Christendom. The amount raised in 1891 by the 160 Mission Churches 
and Societies of the British Empire was £ 1,659,830 and by the 57 
of the United States of America £786,992. Together the two great 
English speaking peoples spent £2,446,822 on the evangelisation of 
the non-Christian world. The balance 302,518 was contributed by 
Germany and Switzerland, Netherlands, Denmark, France, Norway, 
Sweden, Finland and in Asia.” 

It is not possible to give any idea of the resources now utilized in 
the cause because they are not published. But we have sufficient data 
to know how many years it has taken to produce these 6 millions of 
converts. 

Of the first missionary to India who came and sowed there the seed 
of Christianity there is no record. It is believed that Christianity in India 
is of apostolic origin and it is suggested that the apostle Thomas was 
the founder of it. The apostolic origin of Christianity is only a legend 
notwithstanding the existence of what is called St. Thomas’s Mount near 
Madras which is said to be the burial place of the Apostle. There is no 
credible evidence to show that the Gospel was even preached in India 
during the first Century. There is some evidence to show that in the second 
century the Gospel had reached the ears of the dwellers on the Southern 
Indian Coast, among the pearl fishers of Ceylon and the cultivators on the 
coasts of Malabar and Coromondel. This news when brought back by the 
Egyptian Mariners spread among the Christians of Alexandria. Alexandria 
was the first to send a Christian Missionary to India, whose name is 
recorded in history. He was Pantoenus, a Greek stoic who had become a 
Christian and was appointed by Demetrius, the bishop of Alexandria as 
the principal and sole catechist of the school of the Catechumens, which 
had been established for the instruction of the heathen in the facts and 
doctrines of Christianity. At some time between the years 180 and 190 
the Bishop of Alexandria received an Appeal from the Christians in 
India to send them a Missionary and Pantoenus was accordingly sent. 
How long he was in India, how far inland he travelled and what work 
he actually did, there is no record to show. All that is known is that he 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


429 


CHRISTIANIZING THE UNTOUCHABLES 429 

went back to Alexandria, and took charge of his school and continued 
to be its principal till 211 A.D. 

Little is known of the progress of the Gospel on Indian soil through 
the third century. But there is this fact worthy of notice. It is this that 
when the Council of Nicaca was held in 325 A.D. after the conversion 
of the Emperor Constantine Johannes, one of the Assembled prelates 
described himself as “Metropolitan of Persian and of the Great India”. 
This fact seems to indicate that there was at that time a Christian 
Church of some bulk and significance planted on the Indian Coast. 
On the other hand this probably implied little more than an episcopal 
claim to what had always, as in the Book of Esther, been considered a 
province of the Persian Empire. 

The scene shifts from Alexandria to Antioch and from the beginning 
of the third to the end of the fifth century. It is Antioch which took the 
burden of Christian enterprize upon its own shoulder. 

The sixth century was the last peaceful year for Christian propaganda. 
This seems to mark the end of one epoch. Then followed the rise of 
the Saracens who carried the Koran and Sword of Mahammad all over 
Western Asia and Northern Africa, then threatened Europe itself up to 
Vienna and from Spain into the heart of France. The result was that 
all the Christian people were distracted and their Missionary effort was 
held up for several centuries. 

The voyage of Vasco de Gama in the year 1497 to India marks the 
beginning of a new epoch in the history of Christian Missionary effort 
in India and the most serious and determined effort commenced with 
the arrival of the great Missionary Francis Xavier in the year 1542. The 
Portuguese were the first European power in the East and the earliest 
efforts of modern times in the direction of Christianizing the natives of 
India were made under their auspices. The conversions effected under 
the auspices of the Portuguese were of course conversions to the Roman 
Catholic faith and were carried out by Roman Catholic Missions. 

They were not, however, left long without rivals. The Protestants soon 
came into the field. The earliest Protestant propaganda was that of the 
Lutherans who established themselves in Tranquebar in 1706 under the 
patronage of the King of Denmark. The able and devoted Schwartz, who 
laboured in Trichinopoly and Tanjore throughout the second half of the 
18th Century was a member of this mission, which has since, to a great 
extent, been taken over by the Society for the propagation of the Gospel. 

Next came the Baptist Mission under Carey who landed in Calcutta 
in 1793. Last came the Anglican Church which entered the Missionary 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


430 


430 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

field in 1813 and since then the expansion of Missionary enterprize was 
rapid and continuous. 

Thus Christian propaganda has had therefore a long run in India. 
It had had four centuries before the rise of the Saracens who caused a 
break in the Mission Activity. Again after subsidence of the Saracens 
it has had nearly four centuries. This total of six millions is the fruit 
gathered in eight centuries. Obviously this is a very depressing result. 
It depressed Francis Xavier. It even depressed Abbe Dubois who, writing 
in 1823 some three hundred years after Xavier, declared that to convert 
Hindus to Christianity was a forlorn hope. He was then criticized by 
the more optimistic of Christian Missionaries. But the fact remains that 
at the end of this period there are only about 6 million Christians out 
of a total population of about 358 millions. This is a very slow growth 
indeed and the question is, what are the causes of this slow growth. 

Ill 

It seems to me that there are three reasons which have impeded the 
growth of Christianity. 

The first of these reasons is the bad morals of the early European 
settlers in India particularly Englishmen who were sent to India by the 
East India Company. Of the character of the men who were sent out to 
India Mr. Kaye, an Appologist of the Company and also of its servants 
speaks in the following terms in his “Christianity in India”: 

“Doubtless there were some honest, decent men from the middle classes 

amongst them But many, it appears from contemporary writers, 

were Society’s hard bargains — youngsters, perhaps, of good family, to 
which they were a disgrace, and from the bosom of which therefore they 
were to be cast out, in the hope that there would be no prodigals return 
from the ‘Great Indies’. It was not to be expected that men who had 
disgraced themselves at home would lead more respectable lives abroad. 

* * 

“There were, in truth, no outward motives to preserve morality 
of conduct, or even decency of demeanour; so from the moment of 
their landing upon the shore of India, the first settlers cast off all 
these bonds which had restrained them in their native villages; 
they regarded themselves as privileged beings — privileged to violate 
all the obligations of religion and morality and to outrage all the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


431 


CHRISTIANIZING THE UNTOUCHABLES 431 

decencies of life. They who went thither were often desperate 
adventurers, whom England, in the emphatic language of the Scripture, 
had spud out; men who sought those golden sands of the East to 
repair their broken fortunes; to bury in oblivion a sullied name; or 
to bring, with lawless hand from the weak and unsuspecting, wealth 
which they had not the character or capacity to obtain by industry at 
home. They cheated; they gambled; they drank; they revelled in all 
kinds of debauchery. Associates in vice, linked together by a common 
bond of rapacity, they still often pursued one another with desperate 
malice, and, few though they were in numbers, among them there was 
no fellowship, except a fellowship of crime.” 

“All this was against the new comer; and so, whilst the depraved met 
with no inducement to reform the pure but rarely escaped corruption. 
Whether they were there initiated, or perpetrated in destructive error, 
equally may they be regarded as the victims of circumstance 

How bad were the morals and behaviour of the early Christians can 
be gathered from the following instances quoted by Mr. Kaye. 

“The Deputy-Governor of Bombay was in 1669 charged as under : 

That he hath on the Sabbath day hindered the performance of 
public duty to God Almighty at the accustomary hour, continuing in 
drinking of health; detaining others with him against their wills; and 
whilst he drank, in false devotions upon his knees, a health devoted 
to the Union, in the time appointed for the service belonging to the 
Lord’s day, the unhappy sequel showed it to be but the projection of 
a further disunion. 

“That to the great scandal of the inhabitants of the island, of all 
the neighbours round about, both popists and others that are idolators, 
in dishonour of the sobriety of the Protestant religion, he hath made 
frequent and heavy drinking meetings, continuing some times till two 
or three of the clock in the morning, to the neglecting of the service 
of God in the morning prayers, and the service of the Company in 
the meantime had stood still while he slept, thus perverting and 
converting to an ill private use, those refreshment intended for the 
factory in general.” 

On these charges he was found guilty. 

In the factories of the East India Company there was enough of 
internecine strife and the factors of the Company committed scandalous 
outrages in general defiance both of the laws of God and the decencies of 
man. They fought grievously among themselves; blows following words; 
and the highest persons in the settlement settling an example of pugnacity 
with their inferiors under the potent influence of drink. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


432 


432 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The report of the following incident is extracted from the records of 
the Company’s factory at Surat 1 : 

“We send your honours our consultation books from the 21st 
of August 1695 to 31st December 1696, in which does appear a 
conspiracy against the President’s life, and a design to murder the 
guards, because he would have opposed it. How far Messrs. Vauxe 
and Upphill were concerned, we leave to your honours to judge by 
this and depositions before mentioned. There is strong presumption 
that it was intended first that the President should be stabbed and 
it was prevented much through the vigilence of Ephraim Bendall; 
when hopes of that failed by the guards being doubled, it seems 
poison was agreed on, as by the deposition of Edmund clerk and all 
bound to secrecy upon an horrid imprecation of damnation to the 
discoverer, whom the rest were to fall upon and cut off.” 

In the same document is recorded the complaint of Mr. Charles 
Peachey against the President of the Council at Surat — 

“I have received from you (i.e. the President) two cuts on my head, 
the one very long and deep, the other a slight thing in comparison 
to that. Then a great blow on my left arm, which has enflamed the 
shoulder, and deprived me (at present), of the use of that limb; on 
my right side a blow on my ribs just beneath the pap, which is a 
stoppage to my breath, and makes me incapable of helping myself; 
on my left hip another, nothing inferior to the first; but above all 
a cut on the brow of my eye.” 

Such was the state of morality among the early English Settlers who 
came down to India. It is enough to observe that these settlers managed 
to work through the first eighty years of the seventeenth century without 
building a Church. Things did not improve in the 18th Century. Of the 
state of morality among Englishmen in India during the 18th Century 
this is what Mr. Kaye has to say — 

“Of the state of Anglo Indian Society during the protracted 
Administration of Warren Hastings, nothing indeed can be said in 

praise those who ought to have set good example, did grievous 

wrong to Christianity by the lawlessness of their lives 

Hastings took another man’s wife with his consent; Francis did 

the same without it It was scarcely to be expected that, with 

such examples before them, the less prominent members of society 
would be conspicuous for morality and decorum. In truth, it must 
be acknowledged that the Christianity of the English in India was, 
at this time, in a sadly depressed state. Men drank hard and gamed 
high, concubinage with the women of the country was the rule 
1 Quoted by Kaye, Christianity in India, p. 106. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


433 


CHRISTIANIZING THE UNTOUCHABLES 433 

rather than the exception. It was no uncommon thing for English 
gentlemen to keep populous zenanas. There was no dearth of 
exciting amusement in those days. Balls, masquerades, races and 
theatrical entertainments, enlivened the settlements, especially in 
the cold weather; and the mild excitement of duelling varied the 
pleasures of the season. Men lived, for the most part, short lives 
and were resolute that they should be merry ones.” 

* * 

The drunkenness, indeed, was general and obstrusive. It was one 

of the besetting infirmities — the fashionable vices — of the period 

At the large Presidency towns — especially at Calcutta — public 
entertainments were not frequent. Ball suppers, in those days, 
were little less than orgies. Dancing was impossible after them, 
and fighting commonly took its place. If a public party went off 
without a duel or two, it was a circumstance as rare as it was 
happy. There was a famous club in those days, called Selby’s Club, 
at which the gentlemen of Calcutta were wont to drink as high 
as they gamed, and which some times saw drunken bets of 1,000 
gold mohurs laid about the merest trifles. Card parties often sat 
all through the night, and if the night chanced to be a Saturday, 
all through the next day. 


* * 

Honourable marriage was the exceptional state The Court 


of Directors of the East India Company were engaged in 

the good work of reforming the morals of their settlements; and 
thinking that the means of forming respectable marriages would 
be an important auxiliary, they sent out not only a supply of the 
raw material of soldiers’ wives, but some better articles also, in 
the shape of what they called gentle women, for the use of such of 
their merchants and factors as might be matrimonially inclined. The 
venture, however, was not a successful one. The few who married 
made out indifferent wives, whilst they who did not marry, — and 
the demand was by no means brisk, — were, to say the least of it, 
in an equivocal position. For a time they were supported at the 
public expense, but they received only sufficient to keep them 
from starving, and co it happened naturally enough that the poor 
creatures betook themselves to vicious courses, and sold such 
charms as they had, if only to purchase strong drink, to which they 
became immoderately addicted, with the wages of their prostitution. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


434 


434 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The scandal soon became open and notorious; and the President 
and Council at Surat wrote to the Deputy Governor and Council 
at Bombay, saying : “Whereas you give us notice that some of the 
women are grown scandalous to our native religion and Government, 
we require you in the Honourable Company’s name to give them 
all fair warning that they do apply themselves to a more sober and 
Christian conversation : otherwise the sentence is that they shall be 
deprived totally of their liberty to go abroad, and fed with bread and 
water, till they are embarked on board ship for England.” 1 

How bad were the morals and behaviour of the early Christians can 
be gathered from the three following instances which are taken from 
contemporary records. 

Captain Williamson in his ‘Indian Vade Mecum’ published about the 
year 1809 says — 

“I have known various instances of two ladies being conjointly 
domesticated, and one of an elderly military character who solaced 
himself with no less than sixteen of all sorts and sizes. Being 
interrogated by a friend as to what he did with such a member, 
“Oh”, replied he, ‘I give them little rice, and let them run about’. 
This same gentleman when paying his addresses to an elegant young 
woman lately arrived from Europe, but who was informed by the 
lady at whose house she was residing, of the state of affairs, the 
description closed with ‘Pray, my dear, how should you like to share 
a sixteenth of Major ?” 

Such was the disorderliness and immorality among Englishmen 
in India. No wonder that the Indians marvelled whether the British 
acknowledged any God and believed in any system of morality. When 
asked what he thought of Christianity and Christians an Indian is 
reported to have said in his broken English — “Christian religion, devil 
religion; Christian much drunk; Christian much do wrong; much beat, 
much abuse others” — and who can say that this judgment was contrary 
to facts ? 

It is true that England herself was not at the relevant time over 
burdened with morality. The English people at home were but little 
distinguished for the purity of their lives and there was a small 
chance of British virtue dwarfed and dwindled at home, expending on 
foreign soil. As observed by Mr. Kaye 2 “The courtly licentiousness of 
the Restoration had polluted the whole land. The stamp of Whitehall 
was upon the currency of our daily lives; and it went out upon our 
adventurers in the Company’s ships, and was not, we may be sure, 
to be easily effaced in a heathen land”. Whatever be the excuse for 
this immorality of Englishmen in the 17th and 18th Century the fact 

1 Kaye, Christianity in India, p. 106. 2 Ibid., p. 44. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


435 


CHRISTIANIZING THE UNTOUCHABLES 435 

remains that it was enough to bring Christianity into disrepute, and 
make its spread extremely difficult. 

The second impediment in the progress of Christianity in India 
was the struggle between the Catholic and Non-catholic Missions for 
supremacy in the field of proselytization. 

The entry of the Catholic Church in the field of the spread of 
Christianity in India began in the year 1541 with the arrival of Francis 
Xavier. He was the first Missionary of the new Society of Jesus formed 
to support the authority of the Pope. Before the Catholic Church 
entered this field there existed in India particularly in the South a 
large Christian population which belonged to the Syrian Church. These 
Syrian Christians, long seated on the coast of Malabar, traced their 
paternity to the Apostle Thomas, who it is said “went through Syria and 
Cilicia conforming the Churches”. They looked to Syria as their spiritual 
home. They aknowledged the supremacy of the Patriarch of Babylon. Of 
Rome and the Pope they knew nothing. During the rise of the Papacy, 
the Mahomedan power, which had overrun the intervening countries, 
had closed the gates of India against the nations of the West. This had 
saved the Syrian Churches in India from the Roman Catholic Church. 
As to the question whether the Christianity of the Catholic Church was 
the true form of Christianity or whether the Christianity of the Syrian 
Church was the true form I am not concerned here. But the facts remain 
that the Portuguese who represented the Catholic Church in India 
were scandalized at the appearance of the Syrian Churches which they 
declared to be heathen temples scarcely disguised. The Syrian Christians 
shrank with dismay from the defiling touch of the Roman Catholics of 
Portugal and proclaimed themselves Christians and not idolaters. The 
other is that the Malabar Christians had never been subject to Roman 
supremacy and never subscribed to the Roman doctrine. 

The elements of a conflict between the two Churches were thus 
present and the inquisition only gave an occasion for the conflagration. 

The inquisitors of Goa discovered that they were heretics and like a 
wolf on the fold, down came the delegates of the Pope upon the Syrian 
Churches. How great was the conflict is told by Mr. Kaye in his volume 
already referred to. 

The first Syrian prelate who was brought into antagonism with 
Rome, expiated his want of courage and sincerity in the dungeons 
of the Inquisition. The second shared the same fate. A third, whose 
sufferings are more worth of commiseration, died after much trial and 
tribulation in his diocese, denying the Pope’s supremacy to the last. 
The churches were now without a Bishop, at a time when they more 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


436 


436 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

than ever needed prelatical countenance and support; for Rome was 
about to put forth a mighty hand and a stretched-out arm. Don Alexis 
de Menezes was appointed Archbishop of Goa. It was his mission less to 
make new converts than to reduce old ones to subjection; and he flung 
himself into the work of persecution with an amount of zeal and heroism 
that must have greatly endeared him to Rome. Impatient of the slow 
success of his agents, he determined to take the staff into his own hand. 
Moving down to the South, with an imposing military force, he summoned 
the Syrian Churhes to submit themselves to his authority. The Churhes 
were under an Archdeacon, who, sensible of the danger that impended 
over them, determined to temporize, but at the same time to show that he 
was prepared to resist. He waited on the Archbishop. An escort of three 
thousand resolute men who accompanied him on his visit to Menezes, 
were with difficulty restrained, on the first slight and delusive sign of 
violence, from rushing on their opponents and proving their burning zeal 
in defence of their religion. It was not a time for Menezes to push the 
claims of the Romish Church. But no fear of resistance could divert him 
from his purpose; and he openly denounced the Patriarch of Babylon 
as a pestilent schismatic, and declared it a heresy to acknowledge his 
supremacy. He then issued a decree forbidding all persons to acknowledge 
any other supremacy than that of the Roman Pontiff, or to make any 
mention of the Syrian Patriarch in the services of their Church; and, 
this done, he publicly excommunicated the acknowledged head of the 
Syrian Churches, and called upon the startled Archdeacon to sign the 
writ of excommunication. Frightened and confused, the wretched man 
put his name to the apostate document; and it was publicly affixed to 
the gates of the church. 

This intolerable insult on the one hand — this wretched compromise 
on the other — roused the fury of the people against the Archbishop, 
and against their own ecclesiastical chief. Hard was the task before 
him, when the latter went forth to appease the excited multitude. They 
would have made one desperate effort to sweep the Portuguese intruders 
from their polluted shores; but the Archdeacon pleaded with them for 
forbearance; apologised for his own weakness; urged that dissimulation 
would be more serviceable than revenge; promised, in spite of what he 
had done, to defend their religion; and exhorted them to be firm in their 
resistance of Papal aggression. With a shout of assent, they swore that 
they would never bow their necks to the yoke, and prepared themselves 
for the continuance of the struggle. 

But Menezes was a man of too many resources to be worsted in such 
a conflict. His energy and perseverance were irresistible; his craft was 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


437 


CHRISTIANIZING THE UNTOUCHABLES 437 

too deep to fathom. When one weapon of attack failed, he tried 
another. Fraud took the place of violence; money took the place 
of arms. He bribed those whom he could not bully, and appealed 
to the imaginations of men when he could not work upon their 
fears. And, little by little, he succeeded. First one Church fell, and 
then another. Dangers and difficulties beset them. Often had he to 
encounter violent resistence, and often did he beat it down. When 
the strength of the Syrian Christians was too great for him, he 
called in the aid of the native princes. The unhappy Archdeacon, 
weary of resistance and threatened with excommunication, at last 
made submission to the Roman Prelate. Menezes issued a decree 
for a synod; and, on the 20th June 1599, the Churches assembled 
at Diamper. The first session passed quietly over, but not without 
much secret murmuring. The second, at which the decrees were 
read, was interrupted at that trying point of the ceremony where, 
having enunciated the Confession of Faith, the Archbishop renounced 
and anathematized the Patriarch of Babylon. The discontent of the 
Syrians here broke out openly; they protested against the necessity 
of a confession of Faith, and urged that such a confession would 
imply that they were not Christians before the assembling of the 
Synod. But Menezes allayed their apprehensions and removed their 
doubts, by publicly making the confession in the name of himself 
and the Eastern Churches. One of the Syrian priests, who acted as 
interpreter, then read the confession in the Malabar language, and 
the assembled multitude repeated it after him, word for word, on 
their knees. And so the Syrian Christians bowed their necks to the 
yoke of Rome. 

Resolute to improve the advantages he had gained, Menezes 
did not suffer himself to subside into inactivity, and to bask in the 
sunshine of his past triumphs. Whether it was religious zeal or 
temporal ambition that moved him, he did not relax from his labours; 
but feeling that it was not enough to place the yoke upon the neck of 
the Syrian Christians, he endeavoured, by all means, to keep it there. 
The Churches yielded sullen submission; but there were quick-witted, 
keen- sighted men among them, who, as the seventeenth century began 
to dawn upon the world, looked hopefully into the future, feeling 
assured that they could discern even then unmistakable evidences 
of the waning glories of the Portuguese in the East. There was hope 
then for the Syrian churches. The persecutions of Menezes were very 
grievous — for he separated priests from their wives; excommunicated, 
on trifling grounds, members of the churches; and destroyed all the old 
Syriac records which contained proofs of the early purity of their faith. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


438 


438 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The irreparable barbarism of this last act was not to be forgotten or 
forgiven; but, in the midst of all other sufferings, there was consolation 
in the thought, that this tyranny was but for a time. “Sixty years of 
servitude and hypocrisy,” writes Gibbon, “were patiently endured, but as 
soon as the Portuguese empire was shaken by the courage and industry 
of the Dutch, the Nestorians asserted with vigour and effect the religion 
of their fathers. The Jesuits were incapable of defending the power they 
had abused. The arms of forty thousand Christians were pointed against 
their falling tyrants; and the Indian Archdeacon assumed the character 
of Bishop till a fresh supply of Episcopal gifts and Syriac missionaries 
could be obtained from the Patriarch of Babylon”. Such briefly narrated, 
were the results of the oppression of Menezes. In the course of six 
months that ambitious and unscrupulous prelate reduced the Syrian 
church to bondage, and for sixty years they wore the galling chains of 
Rome. But Menezes trusted in his own strength; he came as an earthly 
conqueror, and his reliance was on the arm of temporal authority. “His 
example,” writes Mr. Hough, “should be regarded as a beacon to warn 
future Christian missionaries from the rock on which he foundered. 
Without faith and godliness nothing can ensure a church’s prosperity. 
Failing in these, the prelate’s designs, magnificent as they were deemed, 
soon came to nothing; and it deserves special remark, as an instructive 
interposition of Divine Providence, that the decline of the Portuguese 
interest in India commenced at the very period when he flattered himself 
that he had laid the foundation of its permanency.” 

There was no such open conflict between the Catholic Church and the 
Protestant Missionaries. There was however sufficient rivalry between 
them to prevent cooperation and conceited activity the lack of which also 
prevented a rapid growth of Christianity. 

The third reason which is responsible for the slow growth of 
Christianity was the wrong approach made by the Christian Missionaries 
in charge of Christian propaganda. The early Christian Missionary 
started his campaign by inviting public disputations with learned 
Brahmins on the comparative merits of the Christian and the Hindu 
religions. This was a strange way of going about his task. But there 
was a plan behind it. The Christian Missionary felt that his task of 
converting the masses would be easy of achievement if he succeeded 
in converting the Brahmin and the higher classes of Hindus. For they 
and the Brahmins held sway over the masses. And the easiest way of 
converting the Brahmin was to defeat in disputation and to show him 
that his religion was an error. The Christian Missionary wanted to get 
at the Brahmin. Nothing can explain why the Missionaries started so 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


439 


CHRISTIANIZING THE UNTOUCHABLES 439 

many schools, colleges, hospitals etc., except this namely the Christian 
Missionary wanted to establish a contact with the Brahmin. That 
the Christian Missionary has been deceived is now realized by many. 
The Brahmin and the higher classes have taken full advantage of the 
institutions maintained by the Christian Missions. But hardly any one 
of them has given any thought to the religion which brought these 
institutions into existence. 

There is nothing strange in this. The pursuit of the Brahmin and 
the higher classes of Hindus by the Christian Missionaries was doomed 
to fail. There would be no common ground for the disputation between 
Hinduism and Christianity and where there is a common ground the 
Hindu could always beat the Christian. 

That there could be no common ground for disputation between 
Hindus and Christians is due to the fact that the two have a totally 
different attitude to the relations of theology to philosophy. As has been 
well observed by Mr. Burn , 1 

“The Educated Hindu, when he considers religious questions, 
refuses to separate theology from philosophy and demands what 
shall appear to him a reasonable cosmogony. It has been shown in 
dealing with Hinduism that its prevailing tendency is pantheistic, 
and although for at least two thousand years sects have constantly 
been forming which asserted the duality of God and Spirit, there has 
always been a tendency to relapse into pantheism, and to regard the 
present world as an illusion produced by Maya. The average Christian 
however gets on with very little philosophy and regards that as a 
rule as more speculative than essential to his religious beliefs. The 
methods of thought which a man has been brought up to regard, 
inevitably affect the conclusions at which he arrives, and it appears 
to me that this forms one of the reasons why to the majority of 
educated Hindus the idea of accepting Christianity is incredible. To 
take a single concrete example, the ordinary educated Hindu laughs 
at the belief that God created the Universe out of nothing. He may 
believe in a creation, but he also postulates the necessity for both 
a material cause, matter and an efficient cause, the creator. Where 
his belief is purely pantheistic, he also has no regard for historical 
evidences. A further difficulty on a fundamental point is caused by 
the belief in transmigration, which is based on the idea that a man 
must work out his own salvation and thus conflicts entirely with 
the belief in Divine atonement.” 

Thus the Hindu speaks in terms of philosophy and the Christian 
speaks in terms of theology. There is thus no common ground for 
evaluation, or commendation or condemnation. In so far as both have 

1 Census of India, 1901 Vol. XVI, N. W. Pandbudh. Report Part I, p. 98. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


440 


440 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

theology the Christians with their God and Jesus as his son and the 
Hindus with their God and his Avatars, the superiority of one over 
the other, depends upon the miracles performed by them. In this the 
Hindu theology can beat the Christian theology is obvious enough 
and just as absence of philosophy in Christianity is responsible 
for its failure to attract the Brahmin and the Educated Hindu. 
Similarly the abundance of miracles in Hindu theology was enough 
to make Christian theology pale off in comparison. Father Gregory 
a Roman Catholic priest seems to have realized this difficulty and 
as his view is interesting as well as instructive I give below the 
quotations from Col. Sleeman’s book in which it is recorded. Says 
Col. Sleeman 1 . 

“Father Gregory, the Roman Catholic priest, dined with us 
one evening, and Major Godby took occasion to ask him at table, 
‘What progress our religion was making among the people’ ? 

“Progress” ? said he, “why, what progress can we ever hope 
to make among a people who, the moment we begin to talk to 
them about the miracles performed by Christ, begin to tell us of 
those infinitely more wonderful performed by Krishna, who lifted 
a mountain upon his little finger, as an umbrella, to defend his 
shepherdesses at Govardhan from a shower of rain. 

“The Hindoos never doubt any part of the miracles and 
prophecies of our scripture — they believe every word of them and 
the only thing that surprises them is that they should be so much 
less wonderful than those of their own scriptures, in which also 
they implicitly believe. Men who believe that the histories of the 
wars and amours of Ram and Krishna, two of the incarnations 
of Vishnu, were written some fifty thousand years before these 
wars and amours actually took place upon the earth, would of 
course easily believe in the fulfilment of any prophecy that might 
be related to them out of any other book; and, as to miracles, 
there is absolutely nothing too extraordinary for their belief. If a 
Christian of respectability were to tell a Hindoo that, to satisfy 
some scruples of the Corinthians, St. Paul had brought the sun 
and moon down upon the earth, and made them rebound off again 
into their places, like tennis balls, without the slightest injury to 
any of the three planets (sic), I do not think he would feel the 
slightest doubt of the truth of it; but he would immediately be 
put in mind of something still more extra-ordinary that Krishna 
did to amuse the milkmaids, or to satisfy some sceptics of his 
day, and relate it with all the naivete imaginable.” 


Rambles and Recollections Vol. 1, Ch. 53. p. 407. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


441 


CHRISTIANIZING THE UNTOUCHABLES 441 

As events in India have shown this was a wrong approach. It 
was certainly just the opposite to the one adopted by Jesus and 
his disciples. Gibbon has given a description of the growth of 
Christianity in Rome which shows from what end Christ and his 
disciples began. This is what he says — 

“From this impartial, though imperfect, survey of the process 
of Christianity, it may, perhaps seem probable that the number 
of its proselytes has been excessively maginified by fear on one 
side and by devotion on the other. According to the irreproachable 
testimony of Origen, the proportion of the faithful was very 
inconsiderable when compared with the multitude of an unbelieving 
world; but, as we are left without any distinct information, it is 
impossible to determine, and it is difficult even to conjecture, the 
real numbers of the primitive Christians. The most favourable 
calculation, however, that can be deduced from the examples of 
Antioch and of Rome will not permit us to imagine that more 
than a twentieth part of the subjects of the empire had enlisted 
themselves under the banner of the cross before the important 
conversion of Constantine. But their habits of faith, of zeal, and 
of union seemed to multiply their numbers; and the same causes 
which contributed to their future increase served to render their 
actual strength more apparent and more formidable. 

“Such is the constitution of civil society that, whilst a few 
persons are distinguished by riches, by honours, and by knowledge, 
the body of the people is condemned to obscurity, ignorance and 
poverty. The Christian religion, which addressed itself to the whole 
human race, must consequently collect a far greater number of 
proselytes from the lower than from the superior ranks of life. 
This innocent and natural circumstance has been improved into 
a very odious imputation, which seems to be less strenuously 
denied by the apologists than it is urged by the adversaries of 
the faith; that the new sect of Christians was almost entirely 
composed of the dregs of the populace, of peasants and mechanics, 
of boys and women, of beggars and slaves; the last of whom might 
sometimes introduce the missionaries into the rich and noble 
families to which they belonged. These obscure teachers (such was 
the charge of malice and infidelity) are as mute in public as they 
are loquacious and dogmatical in private. Whilst they cautiously 
avoid the dangerous encounter of philosophers, they mingle with 
the rude and illiterate crowd, and insinuate themselves into those 
minds, whom their age, their sex, or their education has the best 
disposed to receive the impression of superstitious terrors. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


442 


442 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“This favourable picture, though not devoid of a faint 
resemblance, betrays, by its dark colouring and distorted features, 
the pencil of an enemy. As the humble faith of Christ diffused 
itself through the world, it was embraced by several persons 
who derived some consequences from the advantages of nature 
or fortune. Aristides, who presented an eloquent apology to the 
emperor Hadrian, was an Athenian philosopher. Justin Martyr 
had sought divine knowledge in the schools of Zeno, or Aristotle, 
of Pythogoras, and of Plato, before he fortunately was accosted 
by the old men, or rather the angel, who turned his attention 
to the study of the Jewist prophets. Clemens of Alexandria had 
acquired much various reading in the Greek, and Tertullian in 
the Latin language; Julius Africanus and Origen possessed a very 
considerable share of the learning of their times; and, although 
the style of Cyprian is very different from that of Lactantius, we 
might almost discover that both those writers had been public 
teachers of rhetoric. Even the study of philosophy was at length 
introduced among the Christians, but it was not always productive 
of the most salutary effects; knowledge was as often the parent of 
heresy as of devotion, and the description which was designed for 
the followers of Artemon may, with equal propriety, be applied to 
the various sects that resisted the successors of the apostles. ‘They 
presume to alter the holy scriptures, to abandon the ancient rule 
of faith, and to form their opinion according to the subtile precepts 
of logic. The science of the church is neglected for the study of 
geometry, and they lose sight of Heaven while they are employed 
in measuring the earth. Euclid is perpetually in their hands. 
Aristotle and Theophrastus are the objects of their admiration; 
and they express an uncommon reverence for the works of Galen. 
Their errors are derived from the abuse of the arts and sciences 
of the infidels, and they corrupt the simplicity of the Gospel by 
the refinements of human reason.’ 

“Nor can it be affirmed with truth that the advantages of 
birth and fortune were always separated from the profession of 
Christianity. Several Roman citizens were brought before the 
tribunal of Pliny, and he soon discovered that a great number of 
persons of every order of men in Bithynia had deserted the religion 
of their ancestors. His unsuspected testimony may, in this instance, 
obtain more credit than the bold challenge of Tertullian, when he 
addresses himself to the fears as well as to the humanity of the 
proconsul of Africa, by assuring him. that, if he persists in his cruel 
intentions, he must decimate Carthage, and that he will find among 
the guilty many persons of his own rank, senators and matrons of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


443 


CHRISTIANIZING THE UNTOUCHABLES 443 


noblest extraction, and the friends or relations of his most intimate 
friends. It appears, however, that about forty years afterwards the 
emperor Valerian was persuaded of the truth of this assertion, since 
in one of his rescripts he evidently supposes that senators, Roman 
knights, and ladies of quality were engaged in the Christian sect. 

The church still continued to increase its outward splendour as it 
lost its internal purity; and in the reign of Diocletian the palace, 
the courts of justice, and even the army concealed a multitude of 
Christians who endeavoured to reconcile the interests of the present 
with those of a future life. 

And yet these exceptions are either too few in number, or too 
recent in time, entirely to remove the imputation of ignorance and 
obscurity which has been so arrogantly cast on the first proselytes 
of Christianity. Instead of employing in our defence the fictions of 
later ages, it will be more prudent to convert the occasion of scandal 
into a subject of edification. Our serious thoughts will suggest to us 
that the apostles themselves were chosen by providence among the 
fishermen of Galilee, and that the lower we depress the temporal 
condition of the first Christians, the more reason we shall find to 
admire their merit and success. It is incumbent on us diligently to 
remember that the kingdom of heaven was promised to the poor 
in spirit, and that minds afflicted by calamity and the contempt of 
mankind cheerfully listen to the divine promise of future happiness; 
while, on the contrary, the fortunate are satisfied with the possession 
of this world; and the wise abuse in doubt and dispute their vain 
superiority of reason and knowledge.” 

Similarly Hallam in his ‘History of the Middle Ages’ speaks of the 
class from which the early Christians were drawn. 

The reason why Christianity became the religion of all citizens of 
Rome i.e. of the higher classes as well was because of two extraneous 
reasons. The first reason was the making of Christianity state religion 
which meant the proscribing every other religion. The second reason 
was the change in the law of inheritance by the Roman Emperors after 
they became converts to Christianity a preferential right to inherit the 
property of the parents over a child which had remained pagan. 

This only shows that the people to whom Christianity made a natural 
appeal were the poorer classes and it is among them that Christianity 
first spread without the help of law or other extraneous advantage. 

The early Christian Missionary began by reversing this natural 
order of things. I call it natural because it befits human psychology. 
Prof. Thorndyke 1 a great authority on Psychology says — “That a man 


Psychology, Vol. 1. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


444 


444 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

thinks is a biological fact. But What he thinks is a sociological fact”. 
This profound observation, the early Christian Missionary absolutely 
overlooked. Every kind of thought is not aggreeable to every person. 
This is evident from the fact that capitalism appeals to the rich and 
does not appeal to the poor. On the contrary socialism appeals to the 
poor but does not appeal to the rich. This is beause there is a very 
intimate connection between the interests of a man and the thoughts 
which have an adverse effect on his interests. He will not give them 
any quarters in his mind. Applying this annalysis of the working of the 
human mind it is clear that the Brahmin and the higher classes could 
never be receptive to the Christian doctrine. It preaches brotherhood 
of man and when applied leads to equality of man. Now the interests 
of the Brahmin and the higher classes is to maintain the system of 
Chaturvarna — which is a system based upon inequality and which in 
the scale gives them a higher rank, greater opportunity to dominate and 
exploit the others. How can they be expected to accept Christianity ? It 
means a surrender of their power and prestige. To have pursued them 
has been a vain effort and if the pursuit had been continued I am sure 
there would have been no Christians in India at all. The number of 
Christians we see in India today is due to the fact that some Christian 
Missionaries saw the futility of this. If they had not realized this error 
and started to win over the lower classes, there would have been no 
Christians in India at all. Even today hundreds and thousands of high 
caste Hindus take advantage of Christian schools, Christian colleges and 
Christian hospitals. How many of those who reap these benefits become 
Christian ? Every one of them takes the benefit and runs away and does 
not even stop to consider what must be the merits of a religion which 
renders so much service to humanity. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


445 


Chapter 30 

THE CONDITION OF THE CONVERT 


I. Gandhi and his opposition to Christianity. 

II. Christianity and social service. III. Christianity and 

Paganism. 

IV. Christianity and the spirit of the Convert. 

V. Christian Community and its social standing. 

I 

In 1928, there was held a meeting of the International Fellowship, 
a body devoted to promoting fellow feeling among persons of different 
faiths. It was attended by Christian missionaries as well as by Hindus 
and Moslems. Mr. Gandhi was also present. At this meeting the question 
was raised as to how far the fellowship could remain true to its ideal, 
if those who belonged to it wished to convert others to their own faith. 
In the debate that followed, Mr. Gandhi spoke. His friend Mr. C. F. 
Andrews, writes concerning the discussion as follows : ' 

“At the back of this question, there was a definite challenge to 
the whole Christian Missionary position in India. Missionaries of a 
liberal type of mind had been finding great joy in the Fellowship 

Then came Mahatma Gandhi’s declaration. He stated that 

in doing so, or in joining the Fellowship, if there was the slightest 
wish, or even the slightest thought at the back of the mind, to 
influence, or convert, any other member of the Fellowship, then the 
spirit of the movement could be destroyed. Any one who had such 
a wish ought to leave the Fellowship”. 

On being further questioned by Christian Missionaries ‘Whether if 
they possessed the greatest treasure in the World, they would be wrong 
in wishing to share it’, Mr. Gandhi was quick to rebuff their presumption. 
Mr. Andrews says — “he was adamant”. “Even the idea of such a desire 
was wrong”, he said emphatically; “and he would not move from that 
position at all”. 

1 “The Basis of Inter-Religious Fellowship” by C. F. Andrews in “The Young Men of 
India, Burma and Ceylon.” June 1928, Vol. XI, No. 6. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


446 


446 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Mr. Gandhi’s opposition to Christian conversion is by now quite well 
known. And since 1936 he has become quite a virulent adversary of 
all missionary propaganda. He particularly objects to the missionaries 
spreading the Christian Gospel among the Untouchables. His antagonism 
to Christian Missions and the conversion of Untouchables to Christianity 
is based on certain propositions which have been enunciated by him in 
quite unmistakable terms. I think the following four propositions may be 
taken to sum up his position. I give them in his own words. He says : 

I. “My position is that all religions are fundamentally equal. We must 
have the same innate respect for all religions as we have for our own. 
Mind you, not mutual toleration but equal respect .” 1 

II. “All I want them (the Missionaries) to do is to live Christian lives, not 
to annotate them . 2 Let your lives speak to us. The blind who do not 
see the rose, perceive its fragrance. That is the secret of the Gospel 
of the rose. But the Gospel that Jesus preached is more subtle and 
fragrant than the Gospel of the rose. If the rose needs no agents, much 
less does the Gospel of Christ need agents ”. 3 

As to the work of the Christian Missions he says : 

III. “The social work of the missions is undertaken not for its own sake, 

but as an aid to the salvation of those who receive social service . 4 

While you give medical help, you expect the reward in the shape of 
your patients becoming Christians .” 5 

As to the Untouchables he says — 

IV. “I do maintain that the vast masses of Harijans and for that 

matter of Indian humanity, cannot understand the presentation of 
Christianity, and that, generally speaking, conversion, wherever it has 
taken place, has not been a spiritual act in any sense of the term. 
They are conversions of convenience . 6 They (the Harijans) can no more 
distinguish between the relative merits (words omitted ?) than can a 
cow. Harijans have no mind, no intelligence, no sense of difference 
between God and no-God .” 7 

Gandhi advises the Christian Missions in the following somewhat 
offensive terms as to what would be proper for them to do. He says — 

“If Christian Missions will sincerely play the game 

They must withdraw from the indecent competition to convert the 


Harijans 

“Just forget that you have come to a country of heathens 

and (to) think that they are as much in search of God as you are; 
just feel that you are not going there to give your spiritual 

1 Harijan, 1936, p. 330. 2 Harijan, 1936, p. 353. 3 Harijan, April 1937. p. 86. 4 Harijan 


for 1937, p. 137. 6 Harijan, 18th July 1936, p. 178. 6 Harijan for 1936, pp. 140-41. 7 Harijan 
for 1936, p. 360. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


447 


THE CONDITION OF THE CONVERT 447 

goods to them, but that you will share worldly goods of which you 
have a good stock. You will then do your work without mental 
reservation and thereby you will share your spiritual treasures. 

The knowledge that you have this mental reservation, i.e. you are 
expecting a man to be a convert in return for service, creates a 
barrier between you and me.” 

“The history of India would have been written differently if the 
Christians had come to India to live their lives in our midst and 
permeate ours with their aroma, if there was any.” 2 

This hostility of Mr. Gandhi to Christian Missions and their work 
is of very recent origin. I do not know if it can be traced beyond the 
Yeola Decision. 

It is as recent as it is strange. I do not know of any declaration 
made by Mr. Gandhi expressing in such clear and determined manner 
opposition to the conversion of the Untouchables to Islam. The Muslims 
have made no secret of their plan to convert the Untouchables. The plan 
was given out openly from the Congress platform by the late Maulana 
Mohomed Ah when he presided over the annual session of the Congress 
held at Coconada in 1923. In his Presidential address the Maulana 
pointed out in clear terms that : 

“The quarrels (between Hindus and Musalmans) about Alams 
and pipal trees and musical processions are truly childish; but there 
is one question which can easily furnish a ground for complaint of 
unfriendly action if communal activities are not amicably adjusted. 
This is the question of the conversion of the suppressed classes, 
if Hindu Society does not speedily absorb them. The Christian 
missionary is already busy and no one quarrels with him. But the 
moment some Muslim missionary society is organized for the same 
purpose there is every likelihood of an outcry in the Hindu press. It 
has been suggested to me by an influential and wealthy gentleman 
who is able to organize a (Muslim) missionary society on a large 
scale for the conversion of the suppressed classes, that it should be 
possible to reach a settlement with leading Hindu gentlemen and 
divide the country into separate areas where Hindu and Muslim 
missionaries could respectively work, each community preparing 
for each year, or longer unit of time, if necessary, an estimate of 
the numbers it is prepared to absorb, or convert. These estimates 
would, of course, be based on the number of workers and funds 
each had to spare, and tested by the actual figures of the previous 
period. In this way each community would be free to do the work 
of absorption and conversion, or rather of reform, without chances 
of collision with one another”. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


448 


448 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Nothing can be more explicit than this. Nothing can be more 
businesslike and nothing can be more materialistic than this 
pronouncement from the Congress platform. But I am not aware that 
Mr. Gandhi has ever condemned it in the way in which he now condemns 
the endeavour of Christian Missions to convert the Untouchables. Nobody 
from Gandhi’s camp protested against this outrageous suggestion. Probably 
they could not because the Congress Hindus believed that it was their 
duty to help the Musalmans to fulfil what they regarded as their religious 
duty, and that conversion is a religious duty with the Musalman nobody 
can deny. At any rate the Hindu leaders of Congress, as stated by George 
Joseph in 1920, held “that it was the religious duty of the Hindus to 
help Muslims in the maintenance of the Turkish Khilafat over the Arabs 
in the Jazirut-al-Arab because Muslim theologians and political leaders 
assured us that it was their religious duty. It went against the grain 
because it meant the maintenance of a foreign Government over Arabs; 
but Hindus had to stomach it because it was urged on them as part of 
the religious duty of the Hindus 1 . If this is true why should Gandhi not 
help the Christians to carry on conversion because conversion is also a 
fulfilment of their religious duty. 

Why there should be a different measuring rod today because it 
is the Christians that are involved is more than one can understand. 
Mr. George Joseph was well within bounds when he said : 

“The only difference is that there are 75 millions of Muslims 
and there are only 6 millions of Christians. It may be worth-while 
making peace with Muslims because they can make themselves a 
thorn in the side of Nationalism : Christians do not count, because 
they are small in numbers.” 

That Mr. Gandhi is guided by such factors as the relative strength 
of the Musalmans and Christians, their relative importance in Indian 
politics, is evident from the terms he uses in condemning what he calls 
“propaganda by vilification”. When such a propaganda emanates from 
Christian missionaries he uses the following language to condemn it. 
(' Quotation is not there in the MS. — Ed.). 

On the other hand when he comes out against a propaganda emanating 
from the Muslim all that he says : 2 

“It is tragic to see that religion is dragged down to the low 
level of crude materialism to lure people into mission which the 
most cherished sentiments of millions of human beings are trodden 
under foot. 

1 Harijan, 8th February 1936, p. 415. 

2 Harijan, August 8, 1936. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


449 


THE CONDITION OF THE CONVERT 449 

“I hope that the pamphlet has no support from thoughtful 
Musalmans who should read it to realize the mischief such pamphlets 
can create. 

“My correspondent asks me how to deal with the menace. One 
remedy I have applied, viz, to bring hereby the villifying propaganda 
to the notice of the responsible Muslim world. He himself can claim 
the attention of the local Musalman leaders to the publication. 

The second and the most important thing to do is purification 
from within. So long as the position of untouchability remains in 
the Hindu body it will be liable to attacks from outside. It will 
be proof against such attacks only when a solid and impregnable 
wall of purification is erected in the shape of complete removal of 
untouchability.” 

The ferocity of the former and the timidity and softness of the latter 
are obvious enough. Surely Gandhi must be regarded as an astute 
“respecter of persons”. 

But apart from this difference in his attitude towards Muslim and 
Christian propaganda, have Mr. Gandhi’s arguments against Christian 
Missions, which I have summarized above, any validity ? They are just 
clever. There is nothing profound about them. They are the desperate 
arguments of a man who is driven to wall. Mr. Gandhi starts out by 
making a distinction between equal tolerance and equal respect. The 
phrase “equal respect” is a new phrase. What distinction he wants to 
make thereby is difficult to recognize. But the new phraseology is not 
without significance. The old phrase “equal tolerance” indicated the 
possibility of error. “Equal respect” on the other hand postulates that 
all religions are equally true and equally valuable. If I have understood 
him correctly then his premise is utterly fallacious, both logically as well 
as historically. Assuming the aim of religion is to reach God — which 
I do not think it is — and religion is the road to reach him, it cannot 
be said that every road is sure to lead to God. Nor can it be said that 
every road, though it may ultimately lead to God, is the right road. It 
may be that (all existing religions are false and) the perfect religion 
is still to be revealed. But the fact is that religions are not all true 
and therefore the adherents of one faith have a right, indeed a duty, 
to tell their erring friends what they conceive to be the truth. That 
Untouchables are no better than a cow is a statement which only an 
ignoramus, or an arrogant person, can venture to make. It is arrant 
nonsense. Mr. Gandhi dares to make it because he has come to regard 
himself as so great a man that the ignorant masses will not question 
his declarations and the dishonest intelligentsia will uphold him in 
whatever he says. Strangest part of his argument lies in wishing to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


450 


450 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

share the material things the Christian Missions can provide. He is 
prepared to share their spiritual treasures provided the Missionaries 
invite him to share their material treasures “without obligation”.* 
(What he minds is an exchange.) It is difficult to understand why 
Mr. Gandhi argues that services rendered by the Missionaries are baits 
or temptations, and that the conversions are therefore conversions of 
convenience. Why is it not possible to believe that these services by 
Missionaries indicate that service to suffering humanity is for Christians 
an essential requirement of their religion ? Would that be a wrong view 
of the process by which a person is drawn towards Christianity ? Only 
a prejudiced mind would say, Yes. 

All these arguments of Mr. Gandhi are brought forth to prevent 
Christian Missionaries from converting the Untouchables. No body will 
deny to Mr. Gandhi the right to save the Untouchables for Hinduism. But 
in that case he should have frankly told Missions “Stop your work, we 
want now to save the Untouchables, and ourselves. Give us a chance !” 
It is a pity that he should not have adopted this honest mode of dealing 
with the menace of the Missionaries. Whatever anybody may say I have 
no doubt, all the Untouchables, whether they are converts or not, will 
agree that Mr. Gandhi has been grossly unjust to Christian Missions. 
For centuries Christian Missions have provided for them a shelter, if 
not a refuge. 

This attitude of Mr. Gandhi need not deter either the missionaries 
or the Untouchables. Christianity has come to stay in India and, unless 
the Hindus in their zeal for nationalism misuse their political, social 
and economic power to suppress it, will live and grow in numbers and 
influence for good. 

II 

What Christianity has achieved in India therefore becomes a proper 
subject for examination from the points of view both of Christian Missions 
and of the Untouchables. 

That Christian Missions have been endeavouring to provide the 
corpus sanum for the people of India and to create the Mens Sana among 
those who have entered the fold is undeniable. It would be difficult in 
this place to describe all the activities carried on by Christian Missions 
in India. The work done by the Missionaries falls under five heads : (1) 
among children, (2) among young men, (3) among the masses, (4) among 
women and (5) among the sick. 

The work done is vast. The following figures will give an idea of the 
scale on which the work for education and relieving sickness is being 
carried on. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


451 


THE CONDITION OF THE CONVERT 451 

I. CHRISTIAN MEDICAL WORK 1 


1. 

Hospitals 


256 

2. 

Dispensaries 


250 

3. 

Sanatoriums 


10 

4. 

Leper Homes 


38 

5. 

Medical Schools 


3 

6. 

Number of Hospital Beds 


12,000 

7. 

Number of Sanatorium Beds 


755 

8. 

Doctors, Foreign 


350 

9. 

Doctors, National 


390 

10. 

Nurses, Foreign 


300 

11. 

Nurses, National 


900 

12. 

Student Nurses 


1,800 

13. 

Operations, Major 


44,000 

14. 

Obstretrics, Total 


32,000 

15. 

In — Patients 


285,000 

16. 

Out — Patients 


2,600,000 


II. CHRISTIAN EDUCATION 2 




Institutions 

Students 

1. 

Elementary Schools 

13,330 

611,730 

2. 

Secondary Schools 

302 

67,229 

3. 

Colleges 

31 

11,162 

4. 

Theological Colleges and Training Schools 

25 

556 

5. 

Bible Training Schools 

74 

2,855 

6. 

Teacher Training Schools 

63 

3,153 


What have the Hindus to show as against this? Historically speaking, 
service to humanity is quite foreign to Hinduism and to Hindus. The 
Hindu religion consists primarily, of rituals and observances. It is a 
religion of temples. Love of man has no place in it. And without love 
of man how can service to man be inspired ? This is well reflected 
in the purposes and objects for which Hindu charities are given. 
Very few people, even in India, know the extent to which caste 
determines the scope and objects of charities provided by the Hindus. 
It is difficult to get full and precise facts relating to Hindu Charities. 
However, data collected several years ago, in the City of Bombay, 
throws a flood of light on the subject. ( Data not typed in the MS.) 

1 In India, Burma and Ceylon. 

2 In India. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


452 


452 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

That caste can influence doctors in the ministration to the sick was 
a charge made among certain doctors in Bombay in 1918 during the 
influenza epidemic. 

Comparatively speaking, the achievements of Christian Missions in the 
field of social service are very great. Of that no one except a determined 
opponent of every thing Christian can have any doubt. Admitting these 
great services, one may raise two questions. Are these services required 
for the needs of the Indian Christian Community? Are there any needs 
of the Indian Christian Community which have not been attended to 
by Missions? 

It is necessary to bear in mind that Indian Christians are drawn 
chiefly from the Untouchables and, to a much less extent, from low 
ranking Shudra castes. The Social Services of Missions must, therefore, be 
judged in the light of the needs of these classes. What are those needs? 

The services rendered by the Missions in the fields of education 
and medical relief are beyond the ken of the Indian Christians. They 
go mostly to benefit the high caste Hindus. The Indian Christians are 
either too poor or too devoid of ambition to undertake the pursuit of 
higher education. High schools, colleges and hostels maintained by the 
Missions are, therefore, so much misplaced and misapplied expenditure 
from the point of view of the uplift of Indian Christians. In the same 
way much of the medical aid provided by the Missions goes to the Caste 
Hindus. This is especially the case with regard to hospitals. 

I know many missionaries realize this. None the less this expenditure 
is being incurred from year to year. The object of these services is no 
doubt to provide occasion for contact between Christian Missionaries and 
high caste Hindus. I think it is time the Missionaries realized that the 
pursuit of the Caste Hindus in the hope of converting them to Christianity 
is a vain pursuit which is sure to end in complete failure. Mr. Winslow, 
I think, is correct when he concludes his survey of the attitude of the 
intelligentsia of India towards Christianity by saying: 

“ Whilst the work of Duff and the Serampore Missionaries 

resulted in some notable conversions and it seemed for a time as 
though English education were going to lead to many and rapid 
accessions to the Christian Church from amongst those who received 
it, a reaction soon set in and the movement died down. Its place 
was taken by the Theistic Samajes, and in particular by the Brahmo 
Samaj in Bengal, which enabled those Hindus who through the 
influence of Western thought had become dissatisfied with idolatry 
and caste to surrender these without forfeiting entirely their 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


453 


THE CONDITION OF THE CONVERT 453 

place within the Hindu system. For many years Christian 
missionaries hoped and believed that the Brahmo Samaj would prove 
a half-way house to Christianity and that many of its members 
would in course of time become dissatisfied with an intermediate 
position and accept the Christian Faith, but this hope has in the 
main been disappointed, though a few notable converts have come 
from the rank of the Samajes 

***** 


What then, does the educated Indian of today, more particularly the 

Brahman, think of Christ? It is perhaps foolish to try to generalize 

Yet there are certain broad features in the picture which may be 

safely described There is a wide-spread acceptance of the main 

principles of Christ’s teaching, particularly of His ethical teaching. 

It would be generally conceded that the Sermon on the Mount, 
while not necessarily containing any thing which might not be 
paralleled from other sources, is unsurpassable as a directory for 

human conduct Side by side with this widespread acceptance 

of Christ’s teaching goes a very general reverence for His life and 
character 

On the other hand, the claim that Christ was, and is, in a unique 
sense divine is not one which the majority of Hindus, even of those 

deeply attracted by His life, would be prepared to accept (They) 

would set Him side by side with (their) own great Prophet, the 
Buddha. But the Christian claim that He, and He only, is God 
Incarnate, and that salvation is to be won through faith in Him, 

and Him alone, (they) reject as exclusive and narrow Thus the 

Christian claim to possess the one way of salvation arouses in India 

an almost instinctive repugnance The characteristic religious 

attitude of the educated Hindu to day (is) still, whilst he greatly 
reverences Christ, and accepts the main principles of His teaching, 
he is quite content to remain a Hindu.” 

I have no doubt that this correctly sums up the position. If this 
is so then the money and energy spent by the Christian Missions 
on education and medical relief is misapplied and do not help the 
Indian Christians. 

The Indian Christians need two things. The first thing they want 
is the safeguarding of their civil liberties. The second thing they want 
is ways and means for their economic uplift. I cannot stop to discuss 
these needs in all their details. All I wish to point out is that this 
is a great desideratum in the social work the Christian Missions are 
doing in India. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


454 


454 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

While what has been accomplished by Christian Missionaries 
in the field of education and medical aid is very notable and 
praisewrothy there still remains one question to be answered. What 
has Christianity achieved in the way of changing the mentality of 
the Convert? Has the Untouchable convert risen to the status of the 
touchable? Have the touchable and untouchable converts discarded 
caste ? Have they ceased to worship their old pagan gods and to 
adhere to their old pagan superstitions? These are far-reaching 
questions. They must be answered and Christianity in India must 
stand or fall by the answers it can give to these questions. 

The following extracts taken from the memorandum submitted 
by the Christian Depressed Classes of South India to the Simon 
Commission throw a flood of light on the position of the Untouchables 
who have gone into the Christian fold so far as the question of 
caste is concerned. 

“We are by religion Christians, both Roman Catholics and 
Protestants. Of the total population of Indian Christians of the 
Presidency the converts from the Depressed Classes form about 
sixty per cent. When the Christian religion was preached in our 
lands, we, the Pallas, Pariahs, Malas, Madigas, etc., embraced 
Christianity. But others of our stock and origin were not converted 
and they are known to be the Hindu Depressed classes, being all 
Hindus or adherants to the Hindus in religion. In spite, however, 
of our Christian religion which teaches us fundamental truths 
the equality of man and man before God, the necessity of charity 
and love for neighbours and mutual sympathy and forbearance, 
we, the large number of Depressed class converts remain in the 
same social condition as the Hindu Depressed Classes. Through 
the operation of several factors, the more important of them being 
the strong caste retaining Hindu mentality of the converts to 
Christianity, and the indifference, powerlessness and apathy of the 
Missionaries, we remain today what we were before we became 
Christians — Untouchables — degraded by the laws of social position 
obtaining in the land, rejected by caste Christians, despised by 
Caste Hindus and excluded by our own Hindu Depressed Class 
brethren. 

“The small proportion of the Christians of South India, whose 
representatives are found in the Legislative Council, say, in Madras, 
are caste Christians, a term which sounds a contradiction, but 
which, unfortunately, is the correct and accepted description of 
high caste converts from Hinduism, who retain all the rigour and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


455 


THE CONDITION OF THE CONVERT 455 

exclusiveness of caste. Particularly in the Mofussil parts and the 
villages, they who ought to be our fellow Christians follow all the 
orthodox severity and unreason of caste exclusion; they damn us 
as “Panchamas or Pariahs” and ignore our Christian claims and in 
the fulness of their affluence, power, prestige and position exclude 

us poorer Christians from society, Frequent outbursts of anti- 

Panchama activity are the scandal of the South Indian Christian 
life, and the least attempt on our part to better our lot, forward our 
progress and assert our elementary rights call down the wrath and 
fury of every man — official and non-official — Christian or Hindu, who 
claims a foolish superiority of birth. Denying the very foundations of 
Christianity, contrary to all love and charity and brotherhood, our 
“fellow- Christians” treat us even in the Churches as Untouchables 
and Unapproachables, and relegate us to separate accommodation 
removed from their precincts and barricade their portions by means 
of iron rails and walls and fencings. There are several such churches. 

“In the matter of reception of sacraments, a most ridiculous 
segregation is practised to avoid pollution; our claims to educate our 
children and train them for life are ruthlessly denied and through 
sheer prejudice our children are denied access to schools, convents, 
hostels, boarding houses, or if admitted, are assigned an ignominous 
separate accommodation. Tracing his descent from high caste Hindu 
progenitors the caste Christian looks for social status and position 
and finds favour in the eyes of his fellow caste-men, the Hindus. 

He treats the Depressed Class Christians in the same way as the 
Hindu Depressed Classes are treated by the Hindu Caste people”. 

What is stated here in general terms may be made concrete by 
reference to the two following incidents. ( Incidents not mentioned in the 
MS.— Ed.). 

This is a terrible indictment. It is a relief to know that it does 
not apply to all parts of India nor does it apply to all denominations 
of Christians. The picture is more true of the Catholics than of the 
Protestants. It is more true of Southern India than it is of the Northern 
or even Central India. But the fact remains that Christianity has not 
succeeded in dissolving the feeling of caste from among the converts 
to Christianity. The distinction between touchables and untouchbles 
may be confined to a corner. The Church School may be open to all. 
Still there is no gainsaying the fact that caste governs the life of 
the Christians as much as it does the life of the Hindus. There are 
Brahmin Christians and Non-Brahmin Christians. Among Non-Brahmin 
Christians there are Maratha Christians, Mahar Christians, Mang 
Christians and Bhangi Christians. Similarly in the South there are 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


456 


456 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Pariah Christians, Malla Christians and Madiga Christians. They 
would not intermarry, they would not inter-dine. They are as much 
caste ridden as the Hindus are. 

There is another thing which shows that Christianity has not been 
effective in wiping paganism out of the converts. Almost all the converts 
retain the Hindu forms of worship and believe in Hindu superstition. 
A convert to Christianity will be found to worship his family Gods 
and also the Hindu gods such as Rama, Krishna, Shankar, Vishnu, 
etc. A convert to Christianity will be found to go on a pilgrimage to 
places which are sacred to the Hindus. He will go to Pandharpur, and 
make offerings to Vithoba. He will go to Jejuri and sacrifice a goat 
to the blood-thirsty god, Khandoba. On the Ganesh Chaturthi he will 
refuse to see the moon, on a day of eclipse he will go to the sea and 
bathe — superstitions observed by the Hindus. It is notorious that the 
Christians observe the social practices of the Hindus in the matter of 
births, deaths and marriages. I say nothing about the prevalence of 
the Hindu social practices among the Christians. In as much as these 
social practices have no religious significance it matters very little what 
they are. But the same cannot be said of religious observances. They 
are incompatible with Christian belief and Christian way of life. The 
question is why has Christianity not been able to stamp them out? 

The answer is that the Christian Missionaries although they have 
been eager to convert persons to Christianity have never put up a 
determined fight to uproot paganism from the Convert. Indeed they 
have tolerated it. 

The retention by the Converts to Christianity of Paganism is 
primarily the legacy of the Jesuit Missions which were the earliest to 
enter the field in modern times. The attitude of the Catholic mission 
towards paganism has come down from the outlook and the ways and 
means adopted by the Madura Mission. This Mission was founded 
by an Italian Jesuit Father Robert de Nobili. He came to India in 
1608. Having learned of the failure of Francis Xavier he worked out 
a new plan. He decided to follow the footsteps of the Apostle Paul 
who observed that he must bring all things to all men that he might 
save some. Fortified with this belief he went to the Court of Ferumal 
Naik King of Madura and founded the famous Madura Mission. The 
way he started is graphically told by Dr. J. N. Ogilvie in his ‘Apostles 
of India’ in the following passage: 

“Through Madura there ran one day a striking piece of news. 

It was told how a strange ascetic from some far land had arrived, 

drawn to the holy city by its great repute, and that he had taken up 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


457 


THE CONDITION OF THE CONVERT 

his abode in the Brahman quarter of the city. Soon visitors flocked 
to the house of the holy man to see what they should see, but 
only to find that the Brahman’s servants would not permit their 
entrance. ‘The master,’ they said, ‘is meditating upon God. He may 
not be disturbed.’ This merely helped to whet the people’s desire 
and increase the fame of the recluse. The privacy was relaxed, and 
daily audiences were granted to a privileged few. 

“Seated cross legged on a settee the Sanyasi was found by his 
visitors, conforming in every thing to Brahman usage. Over his 
shoulder hung the sacred cord of five threads, three of gold to 
symbolise the Trinity, and two of silver representing the body and 
soul of our Lord, and from the cord was suspended a small cross. 
Conversation revealed the Sanyasi’s learning, and observation and 
keen inquiry certified to this frugal and holy life. One meal a day, 
consisting of a little rice and milk and acid vegetables, was all 
his food. Soon not only ordinary Brahmins came to see him, but 
nobles also; and a great bound in his reputation took place when, 
on being invited to the palace by the King, the Sanyasi declined 
the invitation lest on going forth the purity of his soul should be 
sullied by his eyes lighting upon a woman! Never was a holier 
saint seen in Madura. Where the life bore such testimony to his 
holiness, how could his teaching be other than true! His statement 
that he was a “Roman Brahman” of the highest caste was accepted, 
and to remove any possible doubts that might linger, an ancient 
discoloured parchment was produced, which showed how the 
“Brahmans of Rome” had sprung direct from the god Brahma, and 
were the noblest born of all his issues. To the genuineness of the 
document the Sanyasi solemnly swore, and with open minds the 
people listened to his teaching. 

“Book after book was written by the able and daring writer, in 
which he grafted a modified Christian doctrine on the Hindu stem. 
Most notable of all such efforts was the forging of a “Fifth Veda” to 
complete and crown the four Vedas received by Brahmans as direct 
revelations from heaven. It was an amazing piece of daring as bold 
and hazardous as it would be for a Hindu to forge for Christian 
use a fifth Gospel. Yet the forgery held its place for one hundred 
and fifty years.” 

“Brahman disciples were soon freely won; baptisms became 
fairly numerous, though the identity of the rite with the baptism 
administered by earlier European Missionaries was disguised; and 
so far as outward tokens went, the new Missionary method was 
proving a success. Without a doubt progress was greatly facilitated 
by the highly significant concessions that were made to Hinduism, 


457 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


458 


458 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

especially in connection with Caste. According to de Nobili, caste had 
little signification. To him it was in the main a social observance, 
and so regarding it he saw no reason for compelling his converts 
to break with their caste fellowship or observances. His converts 
retained the ‘Shendi’ or tuft of hair which marked the caste Hindu, 
they wore a sacred cord indistinguishable from that of their Hindu 
neighbours, and they bore an oval caste mark on their brow, the 
paste composing or being made of the ashes of sandalwood instead 
of as formerly of the ashes of cow dung. 

“For forty years de Nobili lived his life: a life of daily hardship, 
sacrifice and voluntary humiliation, such as has seldom been 
paralleled. On February 16, 1656, he died, having reached his 
eightieth year. Nearly one hundred thousand converts have been 
attributed to him, directly or indirectly, and allowing for much 
exaggeration their number must have been very great. 

“In 1673, John de Britto, belonging to one of the noblest families 
of Portugal, sailed for India. He is now a saint in the Roman Catholic 
Church. William Robinson of the London Missionary Society and 
belonging to our own day said of him, “His eminence as a disciple, 
intrepid, selfless and enduring in all great qualities that add to the 
vigour of the Christian life, is assured. 

“He and the Christian converts, after the disruption of the 
Kingdom of Madura and the establishment of petty Kingdoms, were 
mercilessly persecuted. 

“Yet in spite of all that enemies could do, the worker went 
steadily on with his accepted duty, and wherever he journeyed the 
same tale of success was told. To the power of the message was 
added the charm of the messenger, and his converts were numbered 
by thousands. When by his hands a prince of Marava, Tadia Tevar, 
was baptized, measures were quickly taken to secure de Britto’s 
death. He was mercilessly done to death on February 4, 1693. 

“Father Joseph Beschi, an Italian priest and successor to de 
Britto, reached India in 1707. Beschi adhered to the policy of 
the “Roman Brahmans,” but in his missionary practice differed 
considerably from his predecessors. De Nobili, so long as it had 
been possible, acted the part of a devout recluse, a holy Guru; 
de Britto had been chiefly the wandering Sanyasi, the holy 
pilgrim and in their personal life both had practised the greatest 
asceticism and simplicity. But Father Beschi followed a new line. If 
Hinduism had its ascetics, it had also its high priests, who lived in 
luxurious comfort, and whose outward surroundings were marked 
by pomp and circumstance. This was the line chosen by Beschi by 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


459 


THE CONDITION OF THE CONVERT 459 

magnificence he would dazzle the people. When he travelled it 
was a costly palanquin. In advance went an attendant bearing an 
umbrella of purple silk, at each side ran servants with gorgeous 
fans of peacock’s feathers, and in the palanquin, upon a splendid 
tiger skin and clad in rich and picturesque robes, reclined the 
mighty Guru! But Beschi was no empty headed poseur. His 
method was adopted with a full understanding of the people 
and with many it worked well. Nor does his fame rest on these 
extravagances; it is based upon his wonderful scholarship. A born 
linguist he attained so complete a mastery over Tamil that he 
became the ablest Tamil scholar of his time. No native scholar 
was his equal. ‘‘High” Tamil as well as “Low”, the Tamil of the 
scholarly Brahman as well as the colloquial language of the people, 
were equally familiar to Beschi. Dictionaries, grammars, works 
of poetry and treatises in prose issued from his busy pen, and 
they are read and valued to the present day. When first issued 
they delighted the native world of Southern India. So charmed 
with his learning was Chanda Sahib, the Nabob of Vellore, that 
he appointed him to high office in the State, and for his support 
presented him with four villages in the Trichinopoly district, 
which brought in a revenue of 12,000 rupees. All this fame and 
material prosperity Beschi loyally used for the furtherance of the 
Mission. Its palmiest days were in his time, and its rapid decline, 
leading to its ultimate collapse, dates from about the period of 
Father Beschi’s death, which occurred in 1742.” 

These Madura Missionaries, in their anxiety to present 
Christianity to the convert free from any Western customs that 
might give offence had tolerated among their converts several Hindu 
Customs as concessions to the converts. Among these concessions 
were the retention of the sacred thread and the mark on the 
forehead; the marrying of children before they attained puberty; 
the refusal of the sacraments to females at certain times, bathing 
as a ceremonial purification, and other points; and the refusal 
to marry and dine outside caste. These were called the “Malbar 
Rites”. They were abrogated on 12th September 1744, by the Bull 
Omnium sollicitudinum issued 1 By Pope Benedict XIV and since 
then every Roman Catholic Missionary is required to take an oath 
to obey this Bull. All the same the tradition remained that pagan 
ways and pagan beliefs were not incompatible with Christian faith. 

It is no doubt true that a great obstacle in the way of the 
Missionaries in the 16th Century was not only the evil example shown 
by bad Europeans but also the dislike with which European customs 


Krishna District Manual, p. 282. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


460 


460 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

were viewed by Hindus and Musalman alike. A wicked European of 
course caused Scandal, but a devout European, who ate beef and drank 
spirits, offended against Brahmanical and Mohammadan tenets and 
shocked native prejudices. Thus Christianity was despised as the religion 
of the ‘Feringis’ as Europeans were contemptuously termed. To have 
cleansed the Christian Missionaries of these impurities and infirmities 
was very necessary and not only justifiable but commendable. But it 
was quite shameful and sinful for these Jesuit Missionaries in their 
zeal for conversion to have gone to the length they did namely, not to 
mind what the convert thought and did and how he lived so long as 
he was ready to be baptized, acknowledge Jesus as his saviour and call 
himself a Christian. 

What was the attitude of the Luthern Mission which came into the 
field soon after the Madura Mission to this great question. Swartz the 
greatest missionary in India who by his piety became the peace maker 
between warring kings was not a protagonist of the view adopted by the 
Madura Mission. But did he believe that Caste and Christianity were two 
incompatible things and that a true Christian could not believe in Caste 
much less could he make it a plan of his life ? Whatever was his view of 
the question he certainly did not carry on a campaign in support of it. 

What about the Protestant Missions? What attitude did they take 
towards this question ? They have first of all an excuse on their side to 
plead if they wish to. That they came late on the scene. So far as history 
goes there is truth behind the assertion that they were prevented from 
joining the field until 1813. This is due entirely to the attitude taken 
by the East India Company towards Mission work in their territories 
in India. 

The attitude of all the European powers who went to India were in 
the beginning of their career greatly fired with an enthusiasm for the 
conversion of the Indians to the Christian Faith. 

Speaking of the Portuguese they were of course the most resolute 
in their propagation for Christianity and suppression of paganism. 
Albuquerque suppressed Suti within Portuguese India in 1510 and 
anticipated William Bentick by fully three hundred years. As soon as 
Francis Xavier called out in despair the aid of John III of Portugal 
for forcible conversion it was given. In the Dutch East Indies the 
Dutch Government which was a protestant power, similar enthusiasm 
was displayed and strong, if not drastic, measures were adopted. 
The principle of state aid for Christian propaganda was accepted in 
Ceylon right from 1643 when the Dutch occupied that island. The 
erection of temples and pagan pilgrimages were forbidden, Government 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


461 


THE CONDITION OF THE CONVERT 461 

appointments were reserved for Christians and non-attendance at religious 
schools treated as state offence. By 1685, 3,20,000 Cinhalese had yielded 
to these methods. The same religious fervour was shown by the East 
India Company. In 1614, an young Indian had been brought to London 
by the Captain of the Company’s ship. The Company educated him at 
its own expense ‘to be an instrument in converting some of his nation’. 
His baptism was performed at Poplar. The Lord Mayor of London and 
the Directors of the Company attended the baptism. King James I chose 
for him the name of Peter and the priest who baptised him presented 
him to the Audience as ‘the first fruit of India’. In 1617 there took 
place in Surat the conversion of a Mahomedan. Thus the career of the 
Company began with conversions at both ends. In 1657 the Directors 
applied to the Universities of Cambridge and Oxford for a Chaplain 
‘the Company having resolved to endeavour the advance and spreading 
of the Gospel in India’. In 1698 the Company very readily accepted a 
clause in her Charter which required the Company’s Chaplains ‘should 
apply themselves to learn the languages of the countries, the better to 
enable them to instruct the Gentoos, who should be the servants of the 
Company or their agents, in the Protestant religion’. 

Suddenly after 1698 the attitude of the Company seems to have 
undergone a significant though gradual change. While the Portugal and 
the Dutch Governments were going on with top speed the East India 
Company was slowing down. In the very year the Company seems to 
have been of two minds on this question. While it accepted an obligation 
to train its chaplains in vernaculars of India so as to make them potent 
instruments of propaganda it allowed a prayer to be drawn up for the 
Company which said ‘that, we adorning the Gospel of our Saviour in all 
things, these Indian natives among whom we dwell, beholding our good 
works, may be won over’. This prayer continued to be offered, certainly 
till 1750. A close scrutiny of the wording of the prayer suggests if it 
does not avow the complete abandonment of the original idea of active 
proselytising. This attitude of the Company soon became a matter of 
controversy. Lriends of conversion were waiting for an opportunity to 
force the Company to give up this attitude. The Regulating Act of 1773 
and Pitt’s East India Act had put an end to a ‘State disguised as a 
Merchant’ and brought the Company the chartered agent of Parliament 
to carry on the Government of the Indian Territories. It was provided 
under the Act that the charter of the Company should be only for 
20 years and should be renewed thereafter. The year 1793 was of 
immense importance since the revision of the charter of the Company 
was to fall due in that year. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


462 


462 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

To those who favoured the diffusion of Christian knowledge the 
task seemed quite easy. Wilberforce, who was in charge of the matter 
had secured the support of important persons in Parliament. He had 
obtained Archbishop Moore’s blessing, and still more important he 
had won a promise of support from the minister in charge of the 
East India Company’s Charter Bill. As a preliminary to the passing 
of this Bill matters to be incorporated in the charter were put in 
the form of resolutions to be passed by the House of Commons. One 
of the resolutions passed ran as follows: 

“That it was the peculiar and bounden duty of the British 
Legislature to promote, by all just and prudent means, the interest 
and happiness of the inhabitants of the British Dominions in India; 
and that for these ends such measures ought to be adopted as may 
generally tend to their advancement in useful knowledge and to 
their religious and more improvement.” 

“Be it therefore further enacted, that the said Court of Directors 
shall be and are hereby empowered and required to appoint and 
send out, from time to time, a sufficient number of fit and proper 
persons for carrying into effect the purposes aforesaid, by acting 
as schoolmasters, missionaries, or otherwise every such person, 
before he is so appointed or sent out, having produced to the said 
Court of Directors, a satisfactory testimonial or certificate from 
the Archbishop of Canterbury, or the Bishop of London for the 
time being, or from the Society in London for the promotion of 
Christian Knowledge, or from the Society in Scotland for propagating 
Christian Knowledge, of his sufficiency for these purposes. 

And be it further enacted, that the said Court of Directors are 
hereby empowered and required to give directions to the governments 
of the respective presidencies in India, to settle the destination and 
to provide for the necessary and decent maintenance of the persons 
to be sent out as aforesaid; and also to direct the said governments 
to consider of and adopt such other measures according to their 
discretion, as may appear to them most conducive to the ends 
aforesaid.” 

It was largely due to the support of Dundas that the House 
accepted the resolution without demur. Wilberforce was deeply 
moved. ‘The hand of Providence’, he wrote in his journal, ‘was never 
more visible than in his East Indian Affair.’ This confidence was 
premature. Because, on the third reading of the Bill, the clause 
was struck out with the consent of Dundas. Wilberforce wrote his 

friend Gisborne “My clauses thrown out , Dundas most false 

and double ” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


463 


THE CONDITION OF THE CONVERT 463 

This change of front was brought about by the Directors of the 
East India Company. The East India trade was a monopoly of the 
Company and no Englishman could enter the territories of the East India 
Company in India without license from the Directors of the Company 
and any Englishman found in the territories of the Company without 
a license was liable to be deported. The Company did not take long to 
realize what the effect of the new clause would be. It knew that the 
clause would require them to open the gates of India to the flood of the 
Missionaries and their propaganda. Should the Missionaries be allowed 
a free hand, was the question of the hour. As was natural this became 
a subject of a most interesting, instructive and bitter controversy and 
those who care to know it in its details may usefully refer to the pages 
of the Edinborough Review and the of the day. 

There were three parties to this controversy. There were the 
Directors of the East India Company whose primary interest was 
to protect its shareholders who were clamouring for dividends. The 
second party to the controversy was the English Middle Class which 
was living on the East India trade and whose sons were finding new 
avenues for lucrative careers in the territories. Thirdly there was the 

Church Missionary Society formed in the year for the purpose of 

spreading the Christian faith. The interests of the first two coincided. 
They were for the maintenance of the Empire and therefore wanted 
peace and tranquility. The third did care for peace but was keen on 
the substitution of Indian superstition by the Christian faith. The first 
made a powerful combination and obliged all the forces against the third. 
The result was that they triumphed and the Church Missionary Society 
lost. The arguments advanced by the controversialist on the triumphant 
side are of course the most important and the most instructive part 
of the controversy. 

To the argument that the propaganda in favour of the Christian 
faith should begin at once, that it was wrong to hold that the truth 
though sacred should be doled out in such a way and in such bits as to 
avoid all risk, the reply given by Sydney Smith was a stunning reply. 
This is what he said : 

“When we consider for how many centuries after Christ, 
Providence allowed the greater part of mankind to live and die 
without any possibility of their attaining to the knowledge of the 
sacred truths by any human exertion, we must be satisfied that the 
rapid and speedy conversion of the whole world forms no part of the 
scheme of its Almighty Governor, and that it can give no offence 
in His eyes if we do not desert our domestic duties and expose the 


z:\ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK SJ+YS 23-9-2013 464 

464 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

lives and worldly happiness of multitudes of our fellow country men 
to hazard in our attempt to their conversion.” 

•k Jc Jc 

“The Directors would be doing their duty neither to the 
shareholders nor the British Nation if they allowed ‘itinerant tinkers 

to preach the natives into insurrection The natives must be 

taught a better religion at a time and in a manner that will not 

inspire them with a passion for political change.’ Our duties 

to our families and Country are set before us by God Himself. We 
are not at liberty to desert them in order to give a remote chance 
of conferring greater benefits on strangers at a distance.” 

It is arguments such as those which prevailed with Parliament and 
led to the rejection of the Clause in 1793. Wilberforce twitted members 
of Parliament by reminding them with, their Christianity was not a 
religion of convenience but it was a religion established by law. But as 
has been well pointed out, “for the major portion of those ‘counted’ in 
the eighteenth century the religion accepted by the State and Society 
as a convenience was something to be used with fact and discretion at 
home. There was no need to diffuse it recklessly abroad. The general 
atmosphere, as has often been pointed out, was remarkably like that 
of Augustan Rome. To the statesman, thinking imperially, all religions 
were equally useful, each in its proper place.” 1 

The attempt to open the door to the Missionaries failed and the 
Missionary was shut out from India till 1813. Not only was he shut out 
but the Company’s Government kept a strict vigil upon the activities 
of such stray missionaries who contrived to go to India without their 
license. 

In 1793 Dr. Carey went as an interloper without license. As he 
was not allowed to enter Calcutta being without license, he made 
Serampore, 14 miles away from Calcutta as his base of operation. 
Serampore was a Danish settlement and the Danes had placed no 
restrictions on missionaries or mission propaganda. On the contrary 
the Governor of Serampore actively helped them. Carey and his 
Mission was always suspect in the eyes of the Company’s Government. 
In 1798 the Serampore Mission decided to engage four missionaries 
who arrived in the year 1800. They went to reside in the Danish 
settlement of Serampore. As a matter of fact the Governor General 
had nothing to do with them. But the unconcealed residence of those 
unlicensed enthusiasts was too much for the Company’s Governor 
General and Lord Wellesley wrote to the Governor of Serampore, 
“Would His Excellency see to the expulsion of these interlopers who 


Mayhew- Christianity and the Government of India, p. 51. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


465 


THE CONDITION OF THE CONVERT 465 

might at any moment violate the territories of the British East India 
Company”, to which the Danish Governor replied that he would do 
nothing of the kind 1 . Similar action was taken in 1806 when Captain 
Wickes brought two more Missionaries in the ‘Crieterion which anchored 
off Calcutta. Sir George Barlow was then the Governor General. He 
took a most extra-ordinary action to prevent the landing of these two 
missionaries. He ordered that the Captain be not given his clearance 
papers unless he agreed to take back the two missionaries. Although 
they had gone to live in Serampore and were in fact under the protection 
of the Danish Crown. This was not only a more unreasonable attitude 
towards missionaries but it was also an attitude which could not but 
be regarded as hostile 2 . 

The Vellore Mutiny among Indian Soldiers which took place in 1806 
was quite erroneously attributed to missionary propaganda and Sir George 
Barlow in a panicky condition proceeded to put the following restrictions 
on the activities of the Serampore Missionaries: 

1. The Missionaries remain at Serampore. 

2. They must not preach openly in the bazar. 

3. Native converts might preach provided they are not sent forth 
as emissaries from Serampore. 

The vehemence with which the Government of Bengal came down 
upon the Serampore Mission in 1807 for issuing a tract on Islam in which 
quite inadvertently the prophet Mahomed was called an imposter also 
furnishes further evidence of the attitude of hostility which Government 
of the Company bore towards the Missionaries. 

The Government of Bengal refused to be satisfied with the apologies of 
Dr. Carey and insisted upon the transfer of the Press from Serampore to 
Calcutta in order that Government may be in a better position to control 
the literature issued therefrom. The news caused dismay for it meant the 
disruption of the mission. As usual, the Governor of the Danish settlement 
came to their rescue and told the frightened Serampore Missionaries 
that he would fight their battle if the Government of Bengal forcibly 
removed the Press to Calcutta. Subsequently matters were settled and 
the order was withdrawn 3 . But the fact remains that the Government 
of the Company was not a friend of the Missionaries. 

So much for the excuse which they can legitimately plead. But what 
attitude did they take when they were allowed after 1813 to operate in 
the field ? Did they take the line that caste must go from the thought 
and life of the Convert? The earliest pronouncement of a Protestant 
Missionary does not warrant an affirmative answer. 

'J. C. Marshman. Life & Times of Carey, Marshman and word. Vol. 1, p. 
p. 307. 


Ibid., 


z:\ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK SJ+YS 23-9-2013 466 

466 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Missionaries intolerating caste : Dr. Heyne in 1814 wrote : 
Missionaries, in many instances, have fallen into a mistake of a 
very injurious nature to their rapid or even ultimate success. In 
converting a Hindu to Christianity, they oblige him to adopt a line of 
conduct by which he loses his caste; this, in India is considered such 
a disgrace, that it must present a powerful obstacle to conversion. 
But the political division of the Hindus is no part of their religious 
tenets, though it has been so mistaken by the most enlightened. In 
giving to the Hindus the Christian religion, allow them to retain their 
caste, and they could be found to embrace it without reluctance, and 
in considerable numbers.” 1 

But I do not wish to judge the attitude of the Protestant Missions 
to so important a question from so stray a pronouncement of a solitary 
individual. There is evidence to show that the Protestant Missions 
were once early in their career called upon to make up their mind on 
this important issue so that it can be said that the view maintained 
by the Protestant Mission is a considered view. The time when this 
issue was discussed seriously was the time when Rev. Heber was 
appointed the Bishop of Calcutta. He assumed his duties in the year 
1823. During his episcopate he toured extensively in the whole of 
India and in Ceylon. In the course of his tour, he became aware of 
the sharp conflict of opinion among Protestant Missionaries to the 
question of toleration of caste among converts. He decided to resolve 
this difference. How he went about the business is told in the words 
of Mr. Kaye who has succintantly narrated it: 

“There was strife, therefore, among the missionaries, which Heber 
was anxious to allay. The question had been brought before him, 
before he quitted Bengal. He had there sought to arm himself with 
all the information that he could obtain, respecting not only the 
practice of the earlier Protestant missionaries, but the true nature 
of the institution of Caste. There was then in Bishop’s College a 
Christian convert, known as Christian David. He had been a pupil 
of Schwartz; and was truly a remarkable man. No less distinguished 
for his intelligence than for his piety, he was regarded by the good 
Bishop as the one of all others to whom he might most expediently 
refer for the solution of his doubts. Heber drew up, therefore, a 
series of questions, which he submitted to the native Christian, and 
received from him a series of replies, stated not only in excellent 
English, but with a force and precision which could not be easily 
surpassed. 


Krishna District Manual, p. 282. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


467 


THE CONDITION OF THE CONVERT 467 

“First, with regard to the nature of Caste, it was declared by 
Christian David, that it was, among the natives of Southern India, 
“purely a worldly idea” — “not connected in their minds with any 
notion of true or false religion,” that the native converts, drawn 
from the higher castes, were disinclined to intercourse With low- 
caste proselytes, not on religious or superstitious grounds, but 
simply for social reasons; that there were certain distinctions 
between high-caste and low-caste persons not by any means ideal, 
and that these distinctions were not to be gilded over merely by 
the acquisition of worldly wealth. He specially set forth that low- 
caste people indulged habitually in an unseemly mode of speech — 
frequently using coarse or indecent expressions very revolting 
to the feelings of high-caste men; and that they were altogether 
less decorous and self respectful in their way of life. Learning, 
he said, might elevate them; and if a Pariah became learned he 
was called a pundit, and respected by the Church; and then his 
brother converts would associate with him, but still they would 
not “from worldly fear or pride” eat with him from the same dish. 
From the days of Ziegenbalg downwards they had been wont to 
sit at Church in two separate divisions, and had communicated 
separately at the Lord’s table, drinking out of the same cup, but 
the high-caste converts drinking first. As a proof, however, that 
these were regarded as merely worldly distinctions, Christian 
David said that high-caste and low-caste, among the Christian 
congregations of the South, were buried in a common burial 
ground, and took part promiscuously in the funeral ceremonies, 

“as if with the consciousness, contrary to the heathen nations, 
that death levelled all distinctions.” 

“Rather by mild remonstrance and persuasion than by the 
enactment of any stringent rules, which might have proved great 
obstructions to Christianity, the elder missionaries had sought to 
mitigate the evil; and Christian David declared that under the 
ministration of Schwartz the evil had considerably diminished. But 
Mr. Rhenius, of the Church Missionary Society, a truly conscientious 
and devout Christian, had taken other views of the duties of 
Christian teachers, and had gained over to his opinions the younger 
missionaries in the South; so that they agreed, as I have said, 
among themselves, to make the total repudiation of Caste, even in 
its mere social aspect, an essential condition of admittance to the 
Christian Church; and they had, moreover, spoken and preached 
against the elder missionaries — even the most venerated of their 
predecessors — denouncing them as “corrupters of the Gospel” for 
having permitted such things to soil the purity of Christianity. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


468 


468 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Of all this Christian David spoke with profound regret. His own 
opinions were naturally inclined towards the doctrine and the 
practice of his old master Christian Schwartz. The mild interference 
and affectionate advice of the Bishop might, he thought, dispose the 
hearts of the younger missionaries towards greater toleration and 
forbearance. 

“Very earnestly and very conscientiously did Heber revolve this 
important subject in his mind. It is in accordance with all that we 
know of the character of the man, that he should have inclined 
towards the more conciliatory practices of the elder missionaries. 
But he deferred any final decision, until the opportunity should 
arrive for the collection of further information and the delivery 
of a sounder and fuller judgment on the spot. When, therefore, 
he visited the Southern Presidency, he wrote letters of inquiry 
to some of the principal missionaries and instituted a select 
committee of the Christian Knowledge Society for the purpose 
of making further investigation into the subject. From one letter 
written to the Rev. D. Schrievogel, though little more than a 
series of questions, the bent of his opinions may be derived. It 
appeared to him, after much deliberate consideration, that Caste, 
as represented to exist among the Christian converts on the Coast 
was in reality an institution differing little in its essential features 
from the social exclusiveness prevailing in Christian countries. 
Is there no such thing, he asked himself, as Caste in Europe? Is 
there no such thing as Caste in America? Do not the high and the 
low sit apart in our English churches ? Do not our well-dressed 
high-caste folks go up first to the altar to communicate? Do high 
and low sit down to meat together — do their children attend the 
same schools? Are there no Pariahs amongst us? In other civilized 
countries, is there not a prevailing sense of Caste, apart from all 
associations of worldly distinction? Does not the Spanish hidalgo 
wear his Caste bravely beneath his threadbare cloak? Is the 
wealthiest mulatto fit companion for the poorest white? It may 
be called blood, or anything else in another; but in its essential 
features the one thing differs but little from the other. It is an 
intelligible and appreciable Christian principle that all men in 
the sight of God are equal. But it is equally certain that all are 
not equal in the sight of Man; and it is a fair presumption that 
God never intended them to be equal. Social distinctions exist 
every where; and if, argued the Bishop, the distinctions which 
exist among the converts on the Southern coast are merely social 
distinctions, why should we endanger the success of our efforts 
by endeavouring to enforce a law of equality, which is maintained 
among no other classes of men? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


469 


THE CONDITION OF THE CONVERT 


469 


“In this wise thought Bishop Heber. He had said from the first, 
that if he could be of any service to the Christian cause in India, it 
would be as a moderator — that by a conciliatory course, smoothing 
down the asperities of the over-zealship, he might hope to do much 
good as the chief missionary; and now he believed that it was his 
duty to cast in the weight of his authority upon the side of those who 
had resolved not to. pour too much of new wine into the old bottles.” 

This view was more forcefully expressed by another Protestant 
Missionary Rev. Robert Noble who came out to India in 1841 and was 
in charge of the Church of England Mission Work in Masulipatam made 
it a rule to exclude Pariahs, leather workers and scavengers from his 
school. Defending himself against the charge of introducing caste in the 
Christian fold he defended himself in the following terms: “The humblest 
and most pious Christian parents in England would not allow their sons, 
much less their daughters, to be educated with their footmen, with their 
cooks and their scullery maids. Perhaps I was punished oftener by my 
pious father for stealing away to play with the boys of the village than 
on any other account; while in the best ordered Christian family I have 
ever seen, the children were not allowed to converse with the servants or 
to descend the second step of the stairs into the kitchen. My father would 
not have allowed us to mix with the” cook’s or stable boy’s children; nor 
can I see it right to require of Brahmins that before we will teach them 
the Gospel, they must sit down on the same form with the pariah and 
the sweeper. The requirement is to me unreasonable and unchristian.” 

It is true that many wise and devout Christians since Heber’s time 
believed that he was altogether wrong; and that Bishop Wilson at a 
later period reversed his decision emphatically pronouncing against all 
toleration for the inequities of caste on the ground that it was an ingrained 
part of Hindu religion. But the fact remained not only the official but 
also the general view of the Protest Missions’ in India regarding the 
place of caste in Indian Christianity. 

Thus all Missionaries agreed that Christianity should be made easy 
in order that it may spread among India. On this point there seems 
to be difference of kind among Catholics, Lutherners or Protestants. 
Such difference as exists is one of degree. If there exists Caste and 
other forms among Christian converts it is the result of this policy — 

tAn exception must however be made in favour of the Protestant Missionaries of 
America. In July 1847 the American Missionaries passed the following resolution regarding 
this question — 

“That the Mission regards caste as an essential part of heathenism, and 
its full and practical renunciation, after instruction, as essential to satisfactory 
evidence of piety: and that renunciation of caste implies at least readiness to 
eat. under proper circumstances, with Christians of any caste.”, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


470 


470 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

policy of making Christianity easy. In adopting this policy the 
Missionaries never thought that some day, somebody would ask them 
‘What good is Christianity for a Hindu if it does not do away with his 
Caste’. They misunderstood their mission and thought that making 
a person Christian was the same thing as making him a follower of 
Christ. 


V 

Let us take the second part of the question. Has Christianity been 
able to save the convert from the sufferings and the ignominy which 
is the misfortune of every one who is born an untouchable? Can an 
untouchable after his conversion to Christianity take water from a 
public well? Are his children admitted to a public school? Can he 
enter a hotel or tavern which was not open to him ? Can he enter 
a shop and buy things from inside? Will a barber shave him? Will 
a washerman wash his clothes? Can he travel in a bus? Will he be 
admitted in Public offices without compunction ? Will he be allowed 
to live in the touchable quarters of the village? Will the Hindus take 
water from him ? Will they dine with him ? Will not the Hindu take 
a bath if he touches him ? I am sure the answer to every one of these 
questions must be in the negative. In other words conversion has not 
brought about any change in the social status of the untouchable 
convert. To the general mass of the Hindus the untouchable remains 
an untouchable even though he beomes a Christian. 

The question is, why has Christianity not succeeded in raising 
the status of the untouchable convert? What are the reasons for this 
failure? I am not sure that my reasons will be accepted by all those 
who are interested in the problem. But I will state them for what 
they are worth. To understand and appreciate what I am going to 
say I must begin by pointing out that a change in the social status 
of the convert Can be the result of a two-fold change. There must 
be a change in the attitude of the Hindus. Secondly there must be 
a change in the mentality of the convert. Status is a dual matter, a 
matter inter se between two persons and unless both move from their 
old position there can be no change. What has been done by those 
who are in charge of Christian endeavour to make the parties move 
on? A consideration of this question will enable us to understand why 
Christianity has failed to raise the status of the untouchable convert. 

Let us consider the question in parts. What has Christianity done to 
make the Hindus move on? I find they have done nothing. They seem 
to be depending upon an idea doing the miracle. The faith in an idea 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


471 


THE CONDITION OF THE CONVERT 471 

doing the work has been well expressed by the late Duke of Argyle 
when he said: 

“There is no method of reform so powerful as this. If alongside 
any false or corrupt belief, or any vicious or cruel system, we place 
one incompatible idea , — then without any noise of controversy or 
clash of battle, those beliefs and customs will wave an idea. It was 
thus that Christianity, without one single word of direct attack, 
killed off one of the greatest and most universal curses of the pagan 
world, — the ever deepening curse of slavery .” 1 

Whatever may be the importance of an idea, I am sure, history 
does not bear out the conclusion of the Duke of Argyle. It is debatable 
question whether the end of slavery in the Roman Empire was due to 
the influence of Christianity. It is beyond doubt that serfdom continued 
in Europe although Christianity was an established institution for several 
hundred years. It is an incontrovertible fact that Christianity was not 
enough to end the slavery of the Negroes in the United States. A civil 
war was necessary to give the Negro the freedom which was denied to 
him by the Christians. 

The dependence of those in charge of Christian endeavour upon 
planting of an idea and leaving it to work a miracle is therefore one 
of the reasons why the untouchable has remained an untouchable 
notwithstanding his Christian faith. 

Let me take the other part of the question. Does Christianity inspire 
the untouchable to move on ? I am constrained to say that (it)does not. 
So far as I am able to see, Christian preaching to the untouchable is less 
centered on ‘practical’ reforms and more centered around the development 
of Christian social attitudes. Christians who desire the conversion of the 
untouchables insist on regarding Christianity as purely “spiritual”. To 
teach that Christians have an obligation to love others is no doubt very 
valuable. But to stop there and argue that spiritual life expressed in a 
social attitude is quite unrelated to material life and Christians can have 
nothing to do with it, is in my judgment to preach an empty doctrine. What 
is the use of a daily exhortation to a wrong doer to be good and just if 
the exhortation is not followed by action to make the wrong doer just and 
good. The Christian Missionaries have never thought that it was their duty 
to act and get the injustice that pursues the untouchables even after his 
conversion to Christianity removed. That Missions should be so inactive 
in the matter of the social emancipation of the untouchable is of course 
a very sad thing. But far more painful is the inaction of the untouchable 
who becomes a convert to Christianity. It is the saddest thing. He 

1 Quoted by C. F. Andrews. Christ and Labour, p. 25. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


472 


472 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

continues to suffer from the Hindus the same disabilities which were his 
lot before conversion. It is an extraordinary thing that the movement for 
the redress of wrongs is carried on by the untouchables who have not 
become converts to Christianity. I have never noticed the untouchable 
Christians meeting in Conferences for the redress of their social wrongs. 
That they have grievances is beyond question. That there are many 
who are educated enough to lead them in their struggle is also well 
known. Why is it then there has been no movement for the redress of 
their wrongs? 

I see three reasons why the Christian untouchables have failed to 
raise a movement. 

The first reason is to be found in the complete absence of desire on 
the part of the educated among the Christians to take up the cause of 
the community and fight for it. This is due in my judgment to the fact 
that within the Christian Community the educated class and the mass 
has no kinship. The Christian Community is a composite community. In 
some places it is divided into touchables and untouchables. In all places 
it is divided into high class and low class. The educated class is largely 
drawn from the touchable or the higher class. This educated class being 
detached from the lower or the untouchable class of Christians is not 
charged with the wants, the pains, cravings, desires, aspirations of the 
latter and does not care for their interest. The untouchable Christians 
are therefore leaderless and therefore unable to mobilize for the redress 
of their wrongs. 

The second reason why there is no movement among the untouchable 
Christians is due to certain faults in the mental make-up of the convert. 
The mental make-up of the untouchable Christian is characterized by 
a complete absence of any urge to break his bonds. What is the reason 
for this absence of any urge in the untouchable Christian ? It seems to 
me that there are two reasons which account for this. One reason is to 
be found in the antecedent of the untouchable who becomes a Christian. 
An untouchable becomes a Christian for some advantage or he becomes 
a Christian because he likes the teaching of the Bible. But the case is 
very rare of an untouchable becoming a Christian because of a positive 
discontent or dislike of the Hindu religious teachings. The result is that 
Christianity becomes only an addendum to his old faith. It does not 
become a substitute for his old faith. He cherishes both and observes 
them on occasions appropriate to each. 

The second reason for the absence of any urge is due I am afraid to 
the teachings of the Christian Church. The Christian Church teaches 
that the fall of man is due to his original Sin and the reason why one 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


473 


THE CONDITION OF THE CONVERT 473 

must become Christian is because in Christianity there is promise of 
forgiveness of sins. Whatever may be the theological and evangelistic basis 
of this doctrine there is no doubt that from a sociological point of view 
it is a doctrine which is fraught with disaster. This Christian teaching 
is a direct challenge to sociology which holds that the fall of man is due 
to an unpropitious environment and not to the sins of man. There is no 
question that the sociological view is the correct view and the Christian 
dogma only misleads man. It sets him on a wrong trail. This is exactly 
what has happened with the untouchable Christians. Instead of being 
taught that his fall is due to a wrong social and religious environment 
and that for his improvement he must attack that environment he is 
told that his fall is due to his sin. 

The consequence is that the untouchable convert instead of being 
energized to conquer his environment contents himself with the belief 
that there is no use struggling, for the simple reason that his fall is 
due to the sin committed not by him but by some remote ancestor of 
his called Adam. When he was a Hindu his fall was due to his Karma. 
When he becomes a Christian he learns that his fall is due to the sins 
of his ancestor. In either case there is no escape for him. One may well 
ask whether conversion is a birth of a new life and a condemnation to 
the old. 


VI 

Does the Indian Christian Community count in India? What 
importance, what influence does it have in settling the affairs of the 
country. It ought to have importance and influence both in the country 
and society. It is undoubtedly the most educated and enlightened 
community in India. Not only the percentage of literacy among Indian 
Christians is relatively larger than in many other communities in India 
but the University Graduate, Doctors, lawyers are far in excess than can 
be found in communities which are vastly superior to them in number. 
Not only the men are educated but also women are educated. With all 
this light and learning the Christians as a community, it must be said, 
counts for very little — if at all — in the affairs of India. There may be 
difference of opinion on this. But this is the conclusion I have arrived at 
after as close and as impartial a study as I have been able to make. My 
opponent might say that I am mistaken or that I am misrepresenting. 
But I take comfort in the fact that there are some Indian Christians 
who share my view and also my regret. Here are two letters which I 
take from Young India. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


474 


474 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The first is from an Indian Christian to Mr. Gandhi and published 
in the Young India, August 25, 1921. This is what he says: 

“I am sorry to say that you do not take us Indian Christians as the 
people of India, as I have seen many times Young India mentioning 
Mussalmans, Hindus, Sikhs, etc., but omitting the Christians. 

“I should like you to believe that we Indian Christians are also 
people of India, and take much interest in India’s own affairs.” The 
following is the comment made by Mr. Gandhi on this letter. He says: 

“I assure the correspondent and other Indian Christians that 
non-cooperation is no respector of creeds or races. It invites and 
admits all to its fold. Many Indian Christians have contributed to 
the Tilak Swaraj Fund. There are some noted Indian Christians 
as non-cooperators in the front rank. There is constant mention of 
Musalmans and Hindus, as they have hitherto regarded one another 
as enemies. Similarly there always has been some cause when any 
race has been specially mentioned in these columns.” 

Apart from the question whether it is true that many Indian 
Christians have contributed to the Tilak Swaraj Fund and whether it is 
true or not that noted Christians were front rank non-cooperators, the 
answer given by Mr. Gandhi to the main question of the correspondent 
is incorrect if not misleading. If Musalmans are mentioned only because 
they regard the Hindus as their enemies why were Sikhs mentioned? 
Surely they did not regard the Hindus as their enemies. Why were 
they mentioned? The Sikhs were not only mentioned but were treated 
as an important party without whose active cooperation it was felt that 
the struggle for Swaraj could not be carried on. And be it remembered 
that the cooperation given by the Sikhs was not given unconditionally. 
As is well known the Sikhs had put down two conditions in return for 
their cooperation 1 . One condition was that in designing a national flag 
for India the Sikh colour which they said was black should find a place 
in it. Their second demand was that they should be guaranteed by the 
Congress representation in the legislature. It is thus clear that Sikhs 
were not mentioned but placated. But the Christians were not even 
mentioned. Now there are only two explanations for not mentioning the 
Indian Christians. Either they were with the Congress in the struggle for 
Swaraj or that they were not worth mentioning as being too insignificant. 
That they were not with the Congress in this struggle for Swaraj cannot 
be gainsaid. The following letter written by an Indian Christian written 
to the Editor of the Indian Social Reformer and reproduced in the Young 
India expresses the attitude of the Indian Christians to Swaraj: 

“We have positive evidence to show that as early as the second 
century of Christian era there were Christian settlements in India. Such 


Young India. Aug. 4. 1921. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


475 


THE CONDITION OF THE CONVERT 


475 


being the case, Christians in India can claim to have existed in India 
some centuries earlier than the very birth of Islam. How comes it then 
that the Indian Christian born and bred on the soil of India and of 
ancestry purely Indian, has not learnt to cherish the ancient history of 
this country, its culture and to look upon its people, however different 
in their religious persuations, as his bone and of his flesh ? Whence 
is it that unlike him Hindu or Mahomedan fellow citizen he has not 
watched for, aspired to and eagerly welcomed every stage that adds 
a cubit to the cultural, social or political statute of his motherland. 
Why is it that Vande Mataram is a national outpouring of the Hindus 
and Mahomedans only and till now ignored by the Indian Christian ? 

Again how comes it that both Hindus and Mahomedans regard the 
Indian Christian sentiment towards their aspirations as lukeworm if 
not positively hostile and conversely why is it that the ever-growing 
height of the national spirit in India makes the Indian Christian feel 
dwarfed and helpless and suspicious of his security in the future .” 1 

Notwithstanding Mr. George Joseph, K. T. Paul, and Dr. S. K. Datta 
there is no doubt that the Indian Christian Community far from taking 
active part in the struggle for Swaraj was really afraid of it and that this 
letter depicts truly the prevailing attitude of the Indian Christians. The 
reason why the Indian Christians were not mentioned along with the 
Musalmans and the Sikhs is therefore clear. The omission to mention them 
is certainly not due to their being friends of Swaraj. The only conclusion 
that one can draw for such a omission is that they did not count. It is 
a sad thing that so enlightened a community should have no importance 
and no influence in the affairs of the country. 

What can be the reasons for such a position ? The most obvious reason 
is of course, the smallness of its numbers. The weight of its numbers is 
too small to make its existence felt as a force in public life as can be the 
case with the Musalmans or with the Depressed Classes. But this cannot 
wholly account for their insignificance. There must be other factors to 
account for this. I see two. 

One is this. The Indian Christians are living in sheltered waters. 
They are, at any rate, a large majority of them are living in the laps 
of the missionaries. For their education, for their medical care, for 
religious ministration and for most of their petty needs they do not look 
to Government. They look to the Missions. If they were dependent upon 
Government they would be required to mobilize, to agitate, educate, 
and organize their masses for effective political action. For without such 
organization no Government would care to attend to their needs and their 
requirements. They are not in the current and not being in the current 
they care not for public life, and therefore no recognized place in the public. 


Young India. 21st Dec. 1922. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


476 


476 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The second reason is that the Indian Christian is a disjointed — it is 
a better word than the word disunited — Community. All that it has in 
common is a common source of inspiration. Barring this one thing which 
they have in common everything else tends to keep them apart. Indian 
Christians like all other Indians are divided by race, by language and by 
caste. Their religion has not been a sufficiently strong unifying force as 
to make difference of language, race and caste as though they were mere 
distinctions. On the contrary their religion which is their only cement is 
infected with denominational differences. The result is that the Indian 
Christians are too disjointed to have a common aim, to have a common 
mind and to put a common endeavour. To an Indian Christian from Tamil, 
a Hindu from Tamil is much nearer than an Indian Christian from the 
Punjab; An Indian Christian from U.P. feels greater kinship for a Hindu 
from U.P. than he does for an Indian Christian from say Maharashtra. 
In short, the term Indian Christian is just a statistical phrase. There 
is no community feeling behind this phrase. Indian Christians are not 
bound together by what is consciousness of kind which is the test of the 
existence of a community. 

I do not know what Indian Christians will think of what I have 
said of the weaknesses which infect their life. One thing I can say. It 
is this — I am deeply interested in Indian Christians because a large 
majority of them are drawn from the untouchable classes. My comments 
are those of a friend. They are not the strictures of an adversary. I 
have drawn attention to their weaknesses because I want them to be 
strong and I want them to be strong because I see great dangers for 
them ahead. They have to reckon with the scarcely veiled hostility of 
Mr. Gandhi to Christianity taking its roots in the Indian Social structure. 
But they have also to reckon with militant Hinduism masquerading as 
Indian Nationalism. What this militant Hinduism will do to Christians 
and Christianity can be seen from what happened at Brindaban very 
recently. If newspaper reports are true 1 a crowd of mild Hinduism 
quietly went and burned down the Mission buildings in Brindaban and 
warned the missionary that if he rebuilt it they would come and burn 
it down again?! This may be the solitary instance of misguided patriots 
or this may be just a piece of what the Hindus are planning to get rid 
of Christians and Christianity. If it is the shadow of events to come 
then Indian Christians must be prepared to meet them. How can they 
do that except by removing the weaknesses I have referred to? Let all 
Indian Christians ponder. 

• • 


' Indian witness. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


477 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

The books, journals, reports and newspapers listed here include the works 
cited by the author in this volume. The details about the publisher, year of 
publication etc. have been searched out from the Asiatic and the Bombay 
University library about some authors. Details of the remaining authors 
could not be traced — Vasant Moon. 


Dubois, Abbe 

: Hindu Manners, Customs and Ceremonies, 

Oxford, Clarendon Press, 1897. 

Ambedkar, Dr. B. R. 

: Annihilation of Caste — 1936. 

What Congress and Gandhi have done to 
the untouchables, Thacker and Co. Bombay, 
1945. 

Andrews, C. F. 

: The basis of Inter-Religious Fellowship 

in ‘The young men of India, Burmah and 
Ceylon’; June 1928, Vol. XI, No. 6. 

Christ and Labour. 

Baden Powell 

: A Mannual of the Land Revenue Systems 

and land tenures af British India, Calcutta, 
Government Press, 1882. 

Barrow, R. H. 

: Slavery in the Roman Empire. 

Bolton 

: Gandhi in London-, Asia, New York, 

February, 1932. 

Bryce, James 

: The Holy Roman Empire, London, Macmillan, 

1913. 

Bunsen, E. D. 

: Mahomed’s place in the Church, Asiatic 

Quarterly Review, April 1889. 

Crawley 

: Tree of Life. 

Durkheim, Prof. 

: Elementary forms of the Religious life, 

London, George Allan and Unwin Ltd. 1915. 

Elwood, Prof. Charles A. 

: The Religious reconstruction. Society in its 

psychological aspects, 1913 Encyclopaedia 
Britanica, 11th Ed. Vol. XXVI. 

Goulding, Louis 

: The Jewish Problem, Harmondsworth, 

Penguin Books, 1938. 

Grote, George 

: Plato and the other companions of Socrates, 

4 Vols, London, 1888. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


478 


(ii) 


Hallam, Henry 

Johnson, Charles C. 

Jolly, Prof. 
Kane P. V. 
Kaye, Mr. 
Krishnammachariar, Mr M. 


Marshman J. C. 

Mayhew 
Max Muller 


MeDougall William 

Muir, J. 

Negro Year Book 
Niebuhr, Reinhold Prof. 


Ogilvie, Dr. J. N. 
Paton H. J. 
Pattabhi Sitaramayya 


Seignobos, Charles 
Sleeman, Sir W. H. 

Smith, Mr. George 
Smith, Robertson 
Strange, Sir Thomas 

Thorndyke, Prof. Edward L. 

Thurston 

Tawney R. H. 

Winslow Mr. 


View of the State of Europe during the Middle 
Ages, 9th Ed. 2 Vols., London, 1848. 

The Negro in American Civilization. 
Ausbreitung Der Indischen Fultur. 

History of Dharma Shastra, 

Christianity in India. 

History of Classical Sanskrit Literature, 
Madras, Tirumalai-Tirupti Devsthanam 
Press, 1937. 

Life and Times of Carey, Marshman and 
Ward, 2 Vols. 1859. 

Christianity and the Government of India, 
London, Longmans. 1938. 

On effects of Religion with Sacred Books 
Introduction to the Science of Religion, 
London 1873. 

Introduction to Social Psychology ed. 26, 
London, Methuen &Co. 1945. 

Original Sanskrit Texts, 5 Vols. London, 
Trubner & Co. 1873. 

1931-32. 

Moral Man and Immoral Society, a study in 
ethies and politics New York, Charles Ser 
bner’s Sons 1932. 

Apostles of India, London Baird Lectures, 
1915. 

The Goodwill, London, The Library of 
Philosophy, 1927. 

History of the Indian National Congress, 
Madras, Working Committee of the Congress, 
1935. 

History of Ancient Civilization, London, 1937. 
Rambles and Recollections of an Indian 
Official, 2 Vols. London 1915. 

The Conversion of India, 1893 
The Religion of the Semites. 

Treatise on Hindu Law, 2 Vols. Allen and 
Co., Lodnon, 1830. 

Comparative Psychology, 1934. 

Tribes and Castes of Southern India, 7 Vols. 
Madras, Government Press, 1909. 

We mean freedom in what labour can do 1 
London. 

On Christianity in India. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


479 


(iii) 

Scriptures : 

Manu Smriti, Katyayan Smriti, Narada Smriti, Mahabharat, Ramayan, 
Vishnu Puran, Harivamsha, Koran, Bible. 

Journals : 

Adi Hindu of Lucknow, Arya Gazette of Lahor, Afzal, Bombay Samachar, 
Bharat Jyoti, Bombay Chronicle, Civil and Military Gazette of Lahore, 
The Congress of Delhi, Edimborough Review, Free Press Journal, Harijan, 
Hindu, Hindustan Times, Indian News Chronicle, The Independent of 
Allahabad, Jeewan, Milap, National Herald, Nation, Pratap, Prakash, 
Savadhan, Satyasamvad of Lahore, Samata from Bombay, Sangram, 
Statesman, Sunday Times, Tej of Delhi, Times of India, Young India. 

Census Reports of 1881, 1891, 1901, 1911, 1921, 1931, 1951. 

Reports 

Report of Simon Commission. 

Report of the Southborough Committee. 

Report of the Indian Franchise Committee. 

Report of the Indian Round Table Conferences. 

Report of the Tamilnad Harijan Sevak Sangh for the year ending 
30-9-1937. 

U.P. Municipal Act II, 1916. 

Madras — II Criminal Law Journal. 

Madras Legislative Assembly Debates. 

Punjab Municipal Act, 1911. 

Indian Penal Code — Draft — Address by Law Commissioner to the 
Secretary of State. 

Krishna District Manual. 

Starte : Report on the grievances of the Depressed Classes and 
Aboriginal Tribes, 1929. 


• •• 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


480 


INDEX 


Abbas Tyabji : 290 

Abe Dubois : 255-56, 430 

Abhidharma : 186 

Aboriginal Tribes : 138, 242 

Achhut Udharak, Committee, Punjab : 38 

Adam : 473 

Adharma : 273, 280 

Adi Dravida; 30, 279-80, 419 

Adi Parva : 207 

Adityas : 178 

Adult franchise : 310 

African Negroes : 81, 86 

Aga Khan, H.H. : 323-24 

Agastya : 198 

Agres : 154 

Agni : 177-78, 198, 204 
Ainapure Shastri : 169 
Aiyer, Kuppuswami : 28 
Alberuni : 147, 156, 

Albuquerque : 460 
Alexandria : 428-29, 442 
Ali, Maulana Mahomed : 447 
Alleppey Coir Factories : 394 
Alliapascous : 135 
Alsace : 4 

Ambarisha,(sage) : 204-05. 

Ambedkar, Dr. B.R. : 52, 140, 293, 313, 316-17, 
324-26, 352-53, 390. 

American Colonies : 83 
American Negro slave : 14 
Americans : 97-99, 260, 356, 369, 427 
Andhra Brahmins : 212 
Andichya Brahmins : 213 
Andrews, Charles F : 300, 445 
Anglican Church : 429 
Anglo-Indians : 314, 325-26, 432 
Animistic Religion : 181 
Ansari, Dr. : 302, 306 
Anthony Johnson : 83 
Antigna : 87 
Antioch : 429, 441 

Anti-Untouchability League : 363, 367, 369-71. 

Antyaja : 38-39, 147 

Antyevasins : 100 

Apapati'as : 74, 90 

Apostle Thomas : 435 

Apoursheya : 181 

Ara Maxima : 92 

Archdeacon : 436-38 


Aristides : 442 

Aristocracy : 182 

Aristotalian Logic : 307 

Aristotle : 424, 442 

Army, Indian : 108 

Artemon : 442 

Arundhatyas : 419 

Aryans : 73-74, 90, 277, 306 

Arya Samajists : 45, 300 

Asuras : 178 

Atheistic Religion : 181 

Athenian Philosopher : 442 

Athens, Georgia : 13-14 

Atlanta : 13 

Augers : 78 

Augustan Rome : 464 

Augustine : 404 

Augustus : 11, 92 

Australia-Primitive races of : 134 

Austus : 10 

Avarna(s) : 165 

Avarna Castes : 165-69 

Avarna Hindus : 112, 165 

Ayodhya : 204 

Azil of Mhapse : 96 

Babylon : 135-36 
Bachuma : 379 

Backward Classes : 229, 243-44, 267 

Badhatau (caste) : 147-48 

Bahama Island : 80 

Bahiskrit Hitakarini Sabha : 140 

Bahyas (Varna) : 73, 100, 169, 277, 280 

Barnes, Prof. : 170 

Balais : 48-49, 281-83 

Balfour, Lord: 371, 411 

Balmikis : 419 

Baneanes : 149-50 

Baptist Mission : 429 

Barbarism : 135 

Bardoli Programme : 295-96, 299, 303-04, 319. 

Barlo, Sir George : 465 

Barons of England : 345 

Barrow, Mr : 9 

Batavian Republic : 5 

Begar (Forced Labour) : 54-56 

Bellary District Harijan Advisory Board : 36. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


481 


INDEX 


(v) 


Bengal Provincial Franchise Committee : 240, 
244. 

Bentick, William : 460 

Beschi, Fr Joseph : 458-59 

Betunes (caste) : 155 

Bhangi(s) : 25, 30, 32, 39, 44, 239-40 

Bhangi Christians : 455 

Bhattacharya, Mr : 157 

Bhrigu : 193, 204, 207-08 

Biabares (caste) : 153 

Bible : 191,472 

Bihar- Orissa Provincial Franchise Committee : 
240. 

Birkenhead, Lord : 235 

Birla, G D : 372 

Bithynia : 442 

Blackfoot Indian : 188 

Bolshevism : 190 

Bolton Mr : 288 

Bona Dea, rites of : 92 

Bonda Porajas : 130 

Boniface, Bishop : 404 

Book of Esther : 429 

Bookless Religion(s) : 182-83 

Book Religion(s) : 182, 188 

Brahma : 129, 178, 193-94, 200, 205-06 

Brahmanas : 183-84, 192, 198 

Brahmanie Saraswati : 194 

Brahmarakshasa : 173 

Brahmins: 7, 25, 36, 40-41, 47-48, 52, 56-57, 
64-72, 101, 109, 112-15, 129, 141-42, 147-48, 
150-53, 156-58, 164, 183-86, 192-202, 206- 
07, 210-11, 231, 241, 243-44, 263, 275-76, 
278-79,281, 294. 

Brahmin Christians : 455 
Brahmo Samaj : 452-53 
British Dominion : 462 
British Empire : 134, 371, 428 
British Government : 9, 23, 104, 179, 287, 289, 
313, 317, 332-33, 335, 346, 356. 

British Imperialism : 307, 314 

British India : 7, 59, 103, 234-35, 311, 342 

British Parliament : 79, 234, 331, 461, 464 

Brito, John de : 458 

Bryce, James : 128 

Buddha, Lord : 183-87, 453 

Buddha’s philosophy : 186 

Buddhism : 185, 398 

Buddhists : 127, 186 

Bull Omnium Sollicitudinum : 459 

Bunsen, ED: 189 

Burn, Mr : 439 

Caecillius Jucundus : 12 
Caesar : 12, 63,260 
Caletis (caste) : 153 


Cambridge : 461 

Canaqus: 154 

Canute : 404 

Caolian Hill : 11 

Carey, Dr : 429, 464-65 

Carnegie Corporation Fund 98 

Carribbeans : 81 

Carr, Sir Hubert : 327 

Caste(s): 6, 146-64 

Buddha on : 183-87 

and class : 171-72 

Curse of: 211-26 

— and conversion : 423-25 

meaning of : 157-60 

Religious sanction of: 171-81 

Savarna and Avarna : 164-69 

Caste Disabilities Removal Act, 1850: 179 

Caste Hindus: 36, 48,54, 117-20, 123-24, 

230, 238, 243, 259, 281, 458. 

Caste System : 101-02, 165, 384 

Catechumens : 428 

Catholic(s): 78-80, 435, 437, 455, 469 

Catholic Church : 255, 438 

Catholic Mission : 456 

Cato, the Elder : 16-17 

Ceras : 92 

Chamar(s) : 36-38, 40,48,50-51, 239-41,419 

Chamrotti : 62, 259 

Chandala: 74, 90-91, 147, 277 

Chanda Sahib : 459 

Chandragupta Maurya: 145 

Chatterji, Mr : 239 

Chaturvarna : 73, 100, 142-43, 164-65,192, 
275, 277-79. 

Chawdar Tank : 248-50, 252, 261 
Chemosh : 417 
Chenchus : 130 
Cheruman : 141-42 

Chirakal Taluk Harijan Conference : 51 
Chitu, Pindhari : 131 
Chokhamela : 419 
Christ : see Jesus 

Christian Church : 128-29, 249, 467, 472 
Christian Converts : 466, 468 
Christian David : 466-68 
Christian Knowledge Society : 468 
Christian Missionaries : 188, 373, 438-39, 443- 
48, 450, 453-56, 460, 463-71, 475. 
Christianity : 91, 93, 157, 316 
Christians : 43, 51, 77-78, 81, 93-96, 127, 138- 
39, 190-91, 308, 314, 317, 326, 394, 404-05, 
415, 419, 327-31, 434, 438-40, 446-49, 452, 
454-58, 461-63, 466-67, 469-74, 476. 
Church Missionary Society : 463, 467 
Church of England : 469 
Cilicia : 435 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


482 


INDEX 


M 

Circus Mamimus : 11 
Civil Disabilities Removal Act, 1947 : 118 
Civil Disobedience : 296, 307, 345 
Civilization, Vedic : 136 
Civil War (America) : 356 
Class-Caste System : 164-68, 171 
Class-Clan System : 171 
Clavisices Sabinus : 10 
Clemens : 442 
Clients of Rome : 75-76 
Clovis : 404 
Collie (caste) : 49-50 
Columbia, Indians of : 135 
Columbus : 13, 80-81 
Communal Award : 332, 335, 341, 351, 355- 
56, 361-62. 

Communal Question : 329 
Communists : 115, 398 

Conference of Untouchables : 250-52, 254-55, 
258. 

Conquistadors : 81-82 
Constantine, Johannes : 429, 441 
Constituent Assembly of India : 19 
Constitution of India : 19, 287, 325, 330-31, 347. 
Copernicus : 13 
Corinthians : 440 
Council of Falencia : 77 
Council of Nicaca : 429 
Coyanza : 77 
Crawley, Prof. : 407 
Criminal Caste(s) : 165-69, 277 
Criminal Tribes: 112-13, 115, 129, 131-33, 138, 
142-43, 242. 

Crombie A. D. : 36 
Cromwell, Oliver : 14, 292, 428 
Cuiaven : 153 
Cyprian : 442 
Dadabhoy, Hon’ble : 242 
Dail, Irish Parliament : 291 
Damodaran, C. O. : 393 
Dandi : 318-19 
Danes : 464 

Danish Missionary Society : 427 

Danish Settlement : 464-65 

Dasyus : 74, 90, 277 

Datta, Dr. S. K. : 475 

Dattatreya : 208 

Deitistic Religion : 181 

Demetrius : 428 

Democracy : 26, 190 

Depressed Class Christians : 454 

Depressed Classes : see untouchables 

Depressed Classes League of PEPSU : 60-61. 

Depressed Classes Women : 369 

Desai, Mahadev Bhai : 336 


Deshpande, G. B. : 297-98, 301-02, 304 

Devendrakula Vellalars (caste) : 280 

Dewey, Prof. : 414 

Dharma : 273-75, 280, 283-86 

Dharmashastras : 274 

Dhed (caste) : 40 

Diamper : 437 

Din Mahomed, K. B. : 239 

Diocletian : 443 

Dom (caste) : 147-48, 239-41 

Domesday Book : 77 

Dominion Status for India : 383 

Drake, Sir Francis : 82 

Dravida Brahmins : 211-15 

Dravidas : 211 

Dridhanetra : 201 

Drogheda Massacre : 14 

Dualistic Religion : 181 

Duarte Barbosa : 148 

Duff, Grant : 452 

Duke of Argyle : 471 

Dundas : 462 

Durkheim, Prof. : 179-80 

Dusadhs : 240-41 

Dutch East Indies : 460 

Dwijas castes : 168 

Dyer: 123 

Eastern Churches : 437 

East India Company (British): 19,103, 430-34, 
460-63, 465. 

Edimborough Review : 463 
Educational Funds for Negroes : 97 
Edwin, the King : 404 
Elizabeth, the Queen : 82 
Ellwood, Prof. Charles A: 409-10, 418 
English Colonies: 80 
English people : 20 
Epic Fast : 335,341, 356, 365, 370 
Equal Justice : 103-104 
Esquiline Market : 11 
Established Church : 285 
Established Order : 38-39, 46,58-59,90, 103-104, 
107, 116, 396. 

Ethelbert : 404 
Euclid : 442 

European(s): 80,260,314-16, 353,376,382, 459-60. 

European Missionaries: 457 

Ewer, Mr: 287 

Ezhava(s): 54,394 

Falencia: 77 

Fall of Bastille: 255 

Fascism: 190 

Federal Structure Committee : 315,325 
Female Patit : 174 
Feringis : 460 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


483 


INDEX 


(vii) 


Feudalism: 170 
Fifth Veda: 457 

Franchise Sub-Committee :236-38, 332 

Francis Place: 128 

Free Social Order : 15-18 

French people: 398 

Fundamental rights: 321,352 

Galen: 442 
Galilee: 443 
Galileo: 13 
Gadhi(sage): 200,209 

Gandhi, M. K. (Mahatma): 29, 39, 42-43, 45, 
120, 124, 192, 263-64, 267, 474, 476. 
Attitude of — 

towards Christians: 448-50 
towards Muslims: 448-50 
towards Untouchables’ Satyagraha: 
306-09 

— and Communal Award: 327-34 

Correspondence with Samnal Hoare: 
333-40 

and Poona Pact: 341-44 
On Separate Electorates : 352-53 
Rajajis’ correspondence with: 358-62 
and Christ : 376-77 
on temple entry: 380-95 
on conversion: 445-49 
Gandhi, Manilal: 120 
Gandhi Purse Fund: 364-65 
Gauda Brahmins: 211 
Gautam (of Dharma Sutras): 136, 198 
Gavedhukacharu: 193 
Gaya: 262 
Gayatri: 209 
Gentile(s): 3-5 
Gentile Problem: 3-4, 94 
Gentoos: 461 
George Joseph: 448, 475 
Germans: 398, 404 Ghetto: 77 
Gibbon, Edward: 438, 441 
Gidney, Colonel: 326 
Gisborne: 462 
Gobaraha: 23 
Godby, Major: 440 
Golas (Thakurs): 53 
Gopalan, C. S.: 51 
Gospel: 429, 446, 461, 469 
Govardhan: 440 

Government of India Act, 1919: 234, 1935: 
245, 343. 

Granville County: 12 
Greece: 135-36, 190 
Greek (language): 442 
Gregory, Fr.: 440 
Griffith, Arthor: 291 


Grote, Mr. : 284 
Gurjara Brahmins: 213-15 
Guruvayur Temple (Satyagraha): 369, 381, 
387-88, 390. 

Hadi (Caste): 147-48 

Hadrian Emperor: 442 

Haiti: 81 

Halalkhor: 241 

Hallam the Historian: 443 

Hammond Committee: 348-50, 358 

Hansraj, Mr. : 239 

Har Dayal, Prof. : 137 

Hari (caste): 241 

Harjan-363 

Harijans: 29, 31, 33-36, 40-41,43-46, 49, 51-52, 
54-55, 57-58, 60-61, 96, 105, 117-24, 269, 
359-60, 363-64, 372-73, 377, 388, 391-94, 
446. 

Harijan Sevak Sangh: 33-34, 42, 58, 99, 117-18, 
124, 295, 361, 263. 

— of Tamilnad: 122,269 

Harivamsha: 203 

Harriet Martineau: 13 

Hastings, Warren: 432 

Havishyanda: 201 

Heathen: 148-50, 155-56 

Heber, Rev. Bishop: 466, 468-69 

Herald Blastand: 404 

Herald Krag: 404 

Hercules: 92 

Herrenfolk: 112 

Herodotus: 284 

Hesioid: 10 

Heyne, Dr. : 466 

Hibernians : 14 

High Class Castes: 164, 168 

Hinas: 100 

Hindu Charities: 451 

Hindu Civilization: 136-38, 141-43,166 

Hindu faith: 46 

Hindu Law: 64, 92, 172, 174 

Hindu Maha Sabha: 299-300, 322, 357 

Hindu Metaphysics: 136-37 

Hindu-Muslim problem : 288, 294-95, 315 

Hindu-Muslim riots: 127-28, 422, 425 

Hindu Philology: 136 

Hindu Press: 447 

Hindu Proletariat: 398 

Hindu Raj: 128 

Hindus: 3-9, 15, 17-39, 42-57, 62-63, 73, 75, 89- 
112, 115-24, 127-28, 132-39, 143-48, 156-59, 
162-64, 169-70, 172, 189-92, 230-75, 280-82, 
287, 293-94, 299, 306-09, 327-28, 334, 337- 
41, 344, 347-58, 362-91, 396-99, 406, 411-25, 
438-40, 445-60, 466, 470-76. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


484 


INDEX 


(viii) 

Hinduism: 26, 91-93, 142, 158, 161-62, 294, 
333, 336, 340, 349, 398, 406, 411-12, 420, 
423-25, 438-39, 450-51, 457-58, 476. 

Hindu Social Order: 19, 102, 111-16, 145-46, 
156, 158, 163, 166, 247, 252, 255, 258, 396 
Hindu Social Reformers: 316 
Hindu Widow: 176 
His Majesty’s Govt. : 330-34, 336-37 
Hoare, Sir Samuel : 333, 335-36, 338-39 
Hollius, Mr. 132 
Homer : 10 

House of Commons : 79, 462 
Hough, Mr. : 438 
Hudson Bay Territory : 135 
Husain, Mr. Nazir : 239 
Hyginus : 10 

Ibbetson, Sir Denzil : 157 
Ikshvaku (king) : 201-02 

Indian Christians : 314, 325, 426, 452-54. 473-76 
Indian History : 9 

Indian Franchise Committee : 236-38 
Indian Islands in America : 80 
Indian National Congress : 269, 287-90, 292, 
295-303, 325 
Indian Nationalism : 476 
Indian patriots : 291 
Indian Philosophers : 137 
Indian Statutory Commission : 239 
Indian village : 19-21, 25-26 
Indra : 177-78, 198, 203-05, 210 
Inner- light : 361 
Inquisition : 435 

Inter-dining : 101, 299, 319, 372, 390 

Inter-marriage : 4, 101, 299, 319, 372 

Irish Catholics : 14 

Irish Home-Rule : 291, 327 

Irish patriots : 291 

Irish slaves : 14 

Irish Terrier : 94 

Iroquois Confederacy : 171 

Isana : 178 

Islam : 157, 245, 316, 398, 423, 427, 447, 465 
Islamic Culture : 423 
Israel : 137 
Israelites : 190 

Iyer, A. S. Vaidyanatha : 43-44, 122 
Iyer, Mr. Ranga : 380-81, 386, 389 
Iyer, Sir C. P. Ramaswami : 390-91 
Jallianwalla Bagh : 123 
Jamadagni : 209-10 
James, the River : 82 
James I, the King : 461 
Janaka, king of Videha : 184-85 


Jatav (s) : 46-47, 53-54, 56, 419 
Jats : 38, 45, 50 51, 56, 245 
Jazirut-Al-Arab : 448 
Jefferson, Thomas : 13 
Jerusalem, Council of : 4 
Jesuit Missions : 456, 460 
Jesuits : 438 

Jesus Christ : 191, 376, 440-41, 446, 453, 463 
Jesus, the ship : 82 
Jewish Notables of France : 4 
Jewish Patriotism : 4 
Jewish Problem : 3-4, 94-95 
Jews : 3-5, 75, 77-79, 94, 191, 308, 364 
John Caster : 83 
John Chavis : 12 
John Hawkins : 82 
John, the King of England : 345 
John III of Portugal : 460 
Joint Electorates : 237, 310, 320-21, 338, 342, 
347-48, 350, 354-55, 360-61, 371. 

Jolly, Prof. : 423 
Judaism : 4-5 
Judea : 136 
Julius Africanus : 442 
Julius Modestus : 10 
Justin Martyr : 442 
Kaffirs : 323 

Kalaram Temple Satyagraha : 252, 262 

Kali (Goddess) : 131 

Kallar (s) (caste) : 279-80 

Kalota (s) (caste) : 48, 281 

Kalpas : 181 

Kandarpa : 206 

Kanyakubja Brahmins : 221-24 

Kapila : 136, 184, 186 

Karachi Congress : 314 

Karma, Law of : 25, 473 

Karnatik Brahmins : 213 

Kartavirya (Arjuna) : 207-10 

Kashmiri Brahmins : 109 

Kasyapa : 210 

Katyayana : 64, 114, 136, 192-93 
Katyayana’s Srauta Sutras : 192 
Kaushika : 206 
Kaushiki River : 205 
Kavitha : 41, 43, 262, 264 
Kayastha : 244 

Kaye, Mr. : 430-32, 434-35, 466 
Kellappan : 387 
Khadi Scheme : 301 
Khandava Vana : 210 
Khandoba : 456 
Khan Hakim Ajmal : 302 
Khare, Dr. N. B. : 377-78 
Khatkana (caste) : 62, 259 
Khedvala Brahmins : 178 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


485 


INDEX 


(ix) 


Khilafat : 294, 308, 448 
King of Denmark : 429 
Komjak Women : 130 
Koran: 128, 191,323,429 
Kori (caste) : 50 
Krishna (God) : 141, 440, 456 
Kritayuga : 181 

Kshatriyas : 40, 64-66, 68-73, 101, 112-15, 143, 
147, 156, 164, 178, 192-93, 199-202, 207-10, 
241, 275-79, 384 
Kshattrani : 178 
Ku Klux Klan : 57 
Kumarila Bhatta : 186-87 
Kusa (Rishi) : 199 
Kuvera : 198 

Lactantius : 442 
Lafayette Mr. : 12 
Lala Lajpat Rai : 9, 57, 

Las Casas : 81-82 

Laternan Council : 78 

Latin Language : 442 

Lenin : 104 

Lloyd George : 291 

London Missionary Society : 458 

Lord Mayor of London : 461 

Lords of the Manors : 25 

Lothian Committee : 7, 229, 242, 334, 342 

Lothian, Lord : 237 

Louis Goulding : 3, 94-95 

Low Caste : 216-20, 467 

Low Class-Caste (s) : 164, 168 

Lutherners : 429, 469 

Luthern Missions : 460 

Lyall, Sir Alfred : 423 

Lynch Law : 120-21, 123 

MacDonald, Mr. J. Ramsay : 329, 339 

Madhushyanda : 201, 204 

Madiga Christians : 456 

Madigas : 419, 454 

Madras Holmes Company : 30 

Madura Mission : 456, 459-60 

Magna Charta : 345 

Mahabharat : 193, 206, 208, 210 

Mahad Conference : 249-52, 261-62 

Mahad Satyagraha : 293, 306-07 

Mahadeva : 200 

Maharaja of Travancore : 390 

Maharashtra Brahmins : 212 

Mahar (s) : 55, 140-41, 262, 403, 419 

Maharwada : 62, 259 

Mahar Christians : 455 

Mahendra Mountain : 210 

Mahomed, Prophet .189, 191, 323, 429, 465 

Mainatos : 153 


Maithilya Brahmins : 225 
Malabar Christians : 435 
Malabar Rites : 459 
Malabar Temple Entry Bill : 391 
Mala (caste) : 454 
Malaviya, Madan Mohan : 382 
Male Patit : 174 
Malkana (caste) : 425 
Malla Christians : 456 
Manav Dharma Shastra : 172 
Manchester Guardian : 293 
Manen (caste) : 154 
Manes : 174 
Mang Christians : 455 
Mangwada : 62, 259 
Mani Bhavan : 290 
Mantras : 7, 161-62, 232 
Manu: 9, 64, 71, 73, 90-91, 100, 113-15, 169, 
172-74, 193, 199, 254-55, 274-75, 277-80, 
283-86 

Manumission : 10 

Manu Smriti : 90-91, 100, 252, 254-55, 274- 
75, 283-86 
Burning of — 252 
Marathas : 20, 140-41, 243 
Maratha Christians : 455 
Marathi : 127 
Maruts : 178, 206 
Martel, Charles : 404 
Marx, Karl : 104 
Marxist : 192 

Max Muller, Prof. : 129, 181-82, 187, 193, 423 
Maya : 439 

Mayflower, the ship : 82 

Mayo, Miss Catherine : 57 

McDougall, Prof. : 414-15 

Megasthenes : 145, 156 

Megha (caste) : 37 

Mehtars : See Bhangis 

Melur Taluk Harijan Sevak Sangh : 122 

Menezes, Don Alexis de : 436-38 

Menka (nymph) : 205 

Metcalfe, Sir Charles : 19 

Mewar Harijan Sevak Sangh : 58 

Michael Collins : 291 

Militant Hinduism : 476 

Mimansakas : 186-87 

Mimansas : 184 

Minorities Pact : 327 

Minorities Sub-Committee : 241, 312, 323-26, 
335, 337 

Mlenchhas : 74, 90, 277 
Mobites : 417 
Mochi(s) : 239, 241 
Mogeres : 154 
Moghuls : 20 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


486 


INDEX 


(x) 

Moiety : 150 
Momjak Nagas : 130 
Monotheistic Religion : 181 
Monquer : 154 
Montague- Chelmsford Report: 234, 311, 321. 
Monticello : 13 
Moore, Archbishop : 462 
Moors : 77, 148-50,154 
Moplahs : 425 
Moralists : 397 
Morias : 130 
Morley, Lord : 231 

Morley-Minto Councils : 23, 235, 311 
Moses : 191 
Mother India : 57 
Muddiman Committee : 312 
Muirhead, Col. : 362 
Muir, Sir William : 189 
Mullick, Mr. : 240 
Munrow, the President of USA : 13 
Mures, Prof. : 16 
Mushahars : 240-41 
Muslim Empire : 128 
Muslim League : 320, 334 
Muslim Memorial : 7, 230 
Muslim Missionary Society : 447 
Muslim(s) : 7, 29, 38, 44, 50-51, 95, 127-28, 
138, 148, 175, 229-32, 239, 244-45, 265-66, 
273, 288, 293, 300, 308, 313-14, 317, 320-26, 
344, 352, 361, 379, 394, 415, 422-23, 425, 
427, 445, 447-49, 460 474-75. 

Nahusha : 197-98 

Naidu, Sarojini : 297-98, 301 

Nair(s) (caste) : 152-55, 394 

Naomi : 417 

Napoleon : 4 

Napoleonic Regime : 4 

Narada : 64 

Narada Smriti : 274 

Nariman, K. F. : 290 

Narsi Mehta : 289 

Nasik Satyagraha : 293, 307, 339 

National Assembly of France : 4 

Natural Religion : 181-83, 188-89 

Nayadis : 139 

Nazism : 190 

Negroes (in USA) : 12-14, 57, 75, 80-88, 93, 95, 
97-99, 356, 369-70, 471 
Educational Funds for : 97-99 
Lynching of : 57 
Problem of : 95 
—Slave (s) : 14,88,93 
— slavery in America : 80, 83-85 
— Women : 14 


Nehru Committee : 312 
Nesfield : 183 
Nestorians : 438 
Nicholas de Ovando : 80 
Nimi, the king : 198-99 
Nishad : 195, 202 
Nishadasthapati : 193 
Nobili, Robert de : 456-58 
Nomos : 284 

Non-Brahmins : 243, 294 
Non-Brahmin Christians : 455 
Non-Brahmin Party: 115, 164 
Non-Catholic Missions : 435 
Non-cooperation : 267, 294 
Norman Conquest : 77 
Nyaya system : 184 

Ogilvie, Dr. J. N. : 456 
Old Testament : 417 
Olofs : 404 
Orbilius : 10 
Origen : 441-42 

Orthodox Hindus : 138-39, 166, 267-68, 373-74. 
Oswald, King : 404 
Oxford : 461 

Paddy, the dog : 3-4, 94-95 
Paganism : 91-93, 456, 460 
Pahalvas : 200 
Palatine Library : 10 
Pallas : 454 

Panch Dravidas : 211-12, 216, 225 
Panch Gaudas : 216, 225 
Panchama Problem : 319, 455 
Panchavarnya : 100 
Pandit Nanakchand : 239 
Pan Islamism : 128 
Panini : 136 

Pannirselvam, Sir. T. : 391 
Pantoenus, a Stoic : 428 
Pareens : 155 

Pariahs : 27-28, 52, 57, 256, 454-55, 439, 467-68. 

Pariah Christians : 456 

Paris Commune : 104 

Parsis : 308, 338 

Parsuram : 209-10, 

Pastoral Society : 170 

Patel, Sardar Vallabhabhai : 43, 264, 290, 336, 

Patel, Mr. Vithalbhai J. : 290, 301, 303, 306 

Pathans : 20, 378 

Paton, Mr. H. J. : 99 

Patriarch of Babylon : 435-36 

Patricians : 75-76 

Paul, Appostle : 456 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


487 


INDEX 


(xi) 


Paul K. T. : 475 

Peachey, Mr. Charles : 432 

Pepin : 404 

Piccadilly : 323 

Pilgrim Fathers : 82-83 

Pillai, Mr. Thanu : 394 

Pindar : 284 

Pindharies : 131 

Pitt’s East India Act : 461 

Plato : 265, 442 

Plebians : 75-76 

Pliny : 10, 442 

Plymouth Rock : 82 

Poleas : 155 

Primitive races of Polenasia : 134 
Polytheistic Religion : 181 
Pompei : 12 

Poona Pact: 295, 341, 343-44, 347, 349-52, 
354-56, 358, 366, 362, 385, 387. 

Pope Clement VII : 78 
Pope Innocent III : 78 
Pope Benedict XIV : 459 
Portious Trigenimus : 11 
Prayashchittas : 158 

Rabbi Sinzheim : 4 
R. B. Chaudhari Chhoturam : 239 
Rai Sahib Babu Ramcharan : 240 
Rajah M. C. : 344, 356, 358, 360 
Rajah-Moonje Pact : 357 
Rajanya : 177, 193 
Rajasuya Sacrifice : 178 

Rajgopalachariar C. : 301-02, 309, 359-62, 389. 

Rajput Brahmins : 226 

Rajputs : 37, 45-46, 54, 281 

Rama (God) : 210, 440, 456 

Ramakrishna Vydier P. C. : 51 

Ramayan : 47, 204 

Ranade M. G. : 315 

Rathakara : 193 

Ravidas : 419 

Reddy, Vyankata Subba : 27-28 Redmond : 327 

Reformation in Europe : 176, 285 

Reichel, Rev. : 404 

Religious beliefs : 179 

Religious Sanction : 179-80 

Remigius, Bishop : 404 

Reserved Seats : 293, 342, 348-49 

Revealed Religion : 182-83 

Revoleens (caste) : 155 

Rhenius, Mr. : 467 

Richika (Rishi) : 204, 209, 210 

Rig-veda : 176-77 

Risley : 183 

Robert, Mr. Own : 239 


Robinson, William : 458 
Rockfeller Foundation : 98 
Roman Brahman : 457 
Roman Catholic Church : 128 
Roman Catholic Missions : 429, 459 
Roman Catholics : 79-80, 429 
Roman Citizen : 278 
Roman Emperor : 443 
Roman Empire : 9, 14, 16 
Roman Law : 86, 92, 278 
Roman Mythology : 92 
Roman Pontiff : 436 
Roman Prelate : 437 
Roman Religion : 92-93 
Roman Slave : 12, 14, 92 
Roman Territory : 278 
Romans : 11, 17, 76, 265 
Rome : 9, 11, 14-15, 17, 75, 92-93, 135-36, 190, 
278, 335-36, 438,441. 

Romist Church : 436 

Round Table Conference(s), Indian : 236-37, 
241, 287-89, 309, 312-13, 315, 317-18, 324, 
328-30, 332-33, 335, 337, 341, 356. 

Rudras : 178 
Ruth : 417 

Sabbath : 408, 431 
Sacral beliefs : 179-80 
Sacred Code : 181, 189-91 
Sadhyas : 177 
Sakas : 200 
Sakya : 186 
Salt Satyagraha : 318 
Samadhi : 137 
Saman (Veda) : 177 
Samanodakas : 173 
Samantapanchaka : 210 
Sanatanist(s) : 380 
Sanghatan, Hindu : 425 
Sanhedrin : 4 
Sanjana, : 39 

Sankaranarayan, M. S. : 51 

Sankhya (Philosophy) : 184, 186 

Sanskrit : 273 

Santa Maria : 151 

Santramji : 40 

Satyavati : 209 

Sapindas : 173 

Saracens : 429-30 

Sarasvat Brahmins : 178, 216-21 

Sardar Bhuta Singh : 239 

Sardar Ujjal Singh : 313 

Sat-Shudras : 166 

Satapatha Brahmana : 158, 193 

Sati (burning of a widow) : 460 

Satyamurti, S. : 359 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


488 


INDEX 


(xii) 

Savage Society : 407-08 
Savarna Hindus Caste(s) : 165-69, 392-94, 
Scheduled Castes : 8, 47-48, 56, 61, 245 
Schrievogel Rev. D. : 468 
Schwartz, Christian, Rev. : 429, 466-68 
Scotch Terrier (Problem) : 3-4, 94-95 
Scribania : 10 

Scribonius Aphrodisius : 10 
Secretary of State (British) : 103, 230-31, 235, 
312. 

Sein Fein Party : 291 
Seleukos Nickator : 145 
Senart : 183 
Senecca : 76 
Seneda : 10 

Separate Electorates : 237, 310, 313, 315-16, 
321, 357, 361, 371, 387, 396. 

Separate Settlements : 396 
Serampur Missionaries : 452, 465 
Sermon on the Mount : 453 
Shakespeare : 418 
Shankarnarayan M S : 51 
Shankar acharya : 381 
Shanti Parva : 193 

Shastras (scriptures) : 254-55, 273, 374, 384. 

Shastrokta : 161 

Shaw, Bernard G : 323 

Shenvis : 212 

Shiva : 363 

Shruti: 181, 183, 186, 191 
Shuddhi Movement : 423, 425 
Shudras : 47, 64-66, 68-73, 100-01, 112-16, 143, 
147-48, 156-57, 164-68, 177-78, 192-94, 241, 
275-76, 278- 79. 

Shwapakas : 74, 90, 277 
Sikhism : 427 

Sikhs : 20, 127, 239, 293, 308, 312, 316, 325-26, 
329, 352, 474. 

Simon Commission : 7, 234-36, 310, 454 
Simon de Mandfort : 345 
Slavery and Slaves : 9-12, 15-17, 75-76, 83-85, 
89, 91-98, 257, 276, 278. 

Sleeman, Col. : 440 
Smith, Mr. George : 427 
Smith John : 94 

Smith, Prof. Robertson : 407, 413, 416-17. 

Smith, Sydney : 463 

Smritis : 253, 274 

Snetonius : 10 

Social boycott : 314, 386 

Social Conference : 315 

Social Equality : 383-84 

Social Equality League : 368 

Society of Jesus : 435 

Soma : 178, 198 

Somavanshis : 140, 419 


Soviet communism : 104 

Southborough Committee : 235-36, 311 

Spaniards : 80-82 

Spanish Armada : 82 

Spanish Hidalgo : 468 

Srinivasan, R : 385 

St. James Palace : 287, 335 

Strange, Sir Thomas : 174 

St. Thomas, Mount : 428 

St. Paul : 440 

Sukhdevji, Dr. : 38 

Sunassepa : 204-05 

Swadeshi : 295 

Swanji Anand Tirth : 118, 124 
Swami Ramanandji Sanyasi : 50 
Swami Shradhanandji : 40, 45, 297-98, 300- 
302, 306, 425. 

Swaraj : 295, 299, 306, 312, 315, 318, 329, 
474-75. 

Swaraj Parliament : 363 
Swartz, the Missionary : 460 
Swayambhu : 64, 67, 276 
Syrian Christians : 435, 437 
Syrian Church : 435-38 

Taittiriya Brahmana : 178 
Tamil : 127, 459, 476 
Tamil Brahmins : 212 

Tamilnad Harijan Sevak Sangh : 105, 122 269. 
Tantra-Varttika : 186 
Tawney, Mr. : 109 

Temple Entry (Bill) : 359, 361, 380-84, 386-87, 
389-92, 395 
Tertullian : 442 

Thakkar, A. V : 39, 59, 367, 372 
Thakkurs : 56, 244 
Theistic Samajes : 452 
Thiya : 51 

Thomas, apostle : 428, 435 
Thorndyke, Prof. : 443 
Thug(s) : 131-32 
Thugee: 132 
Thurston, Mr : 139 
Tiele, Prof. : 406 

Tilak Swaraj Fund : 295, 297, 474 
Tolstoy : 370 
Tories : 128, 346 

Touchable Hindus : 3, 7, 21-26, 44, 55, 62-63, 
93, 104, 140-41, 192, 231, 241-42, 244, 248, 
250, 259-261, 267. 

Town Hall of Paris : 4 
Trinity : 457 
Trishanku : 201-04 
Tufts, Prof. : 414 
Tuias : 154 
Tyagi Brahmins : 44 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


489 


INDEX 


Ulster : 291, 327 
Unapproachables : 139-40, 242 
Unapproachability : 229, 240, 242 
Unfree Social Order : 16, 17 
Unhappy India : 9, 57 

United Provincial Franchise Committee : 239 
40. 

Untouchable caste(s) : 165, 168 
Untouchable Christians : 472-73 
U ntouchables — 

atrocities on : 35-61, 117-24 
— and administration: 103-11 
— and Christianity : 426-75 
— and conversion : 423-25 
Gandhi and — 207 — 395 
Life in Indian village of — 19-26 
Population of — 6-18, 229-46 
Revolt by : 248-56. 

Slaves and — 9-18, 75-88 
Touchables and — 62-64 
U ntouchability — 

— and administration: 103-11 
compared with Slavery : 75-88 
Hindu Law on — 64-74, 90-91 
— in Indian village : 19-26 
test of : 7 
source of - 3-5 
— and lawlessness : 35-61 

Vachaspati Misra : 185 
Vahal, Rev. J. : 391-92 
Vaikom Satyagraha : 247, 307 
Vaiseshika : 184, 186 
Vaishnavism : 363 

Vaishyas : 64-66, 68-73, 101, 112-14, 143, 156, 
164, 177, 192, 193, 241, 275-76, 278-79. 
Valerian, Emperor : 443 
Valmiki : 136 
Vande Mataram : 475 
Varna System : 156, 164, 169 
Varuna : 178, 198, 200 
Vasco de Gama : 429 
Vashistha : 198-204, 207-08 
Vasudevas : 178 
Vasus : 178 
Vat Tyler : 345 
Vayu : 177, 209 
Vedanta : 166 

Vedanta Sutras : 185-86, 176, 181, 183-87, 191, 
193,207-08, 232,253. 

Vedas: 7, 64-65, 67, 71, 102, 113-14, 457 


(xiii) 

Vedic Literature : 193 
Vedokta : 161 
Vellore Mutiny : 465 
Vernius Flaccus : 10 
Vesta-rites of : 92 
Village Republic : 25-26 
Villeinage : 75, 190 
Vinaya : 186 
Vireshwar temple : 261 
Vishnu, the God : 36, 64, 200 
Vishnu Puran : 198-99, 204 
Visvamitra : 184, 199-207 
Vithoba : 456 
Vladimir, King : 404 
Voltaire : 255 
Vratya : 423 
Vyasa : 136, 207 

Vykom Satyagraha : 35, 247, 307 

Weightage-Principle of : 244 
Wells’ Comet : 135 
Wellesley, Lord : 464 
Westminster Abbey : 423 
Whigs : 128 
Whig Senator : 13 
Whitehall : 434 

Whites, the : 95, 97-98, 370, 398 
Wickes, Captain : 465 
Wilberforce : 462-64 
William, the conquerer : 77 
Williamson, Captain : 434 
Wilson, Bishop : 469 
Winslow, Mr : 452 

Xavier, St. Francis : 429-30, 435, 456, 460 

Yadnik, Indulal : 30, 297-98, 301 Yagas : 423 

Yajnavalkya (Smriti) : 64, 185, 274 

Yajush : 177 

Yama : 178, 198 

Yavanas : 200 

Yeola Conference : 390 

Yeravada Fast : 361 

Yeravada gaol : 332 

Yezhawa (caste) : 390 

Yoga: 137, 184 

Zeno : 442 

Ziegenbalg : 467 

Zoroaster : 191 

Zoroastrians : 190-91 

• • 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


490 


I'iMli he aitada is aufcEiigc 

understand «Ly lir. GauSui fci.^3 x&at ^arvices s\tx-L.;±£.Z by the 
Hissiomrica ere baits , testation® , ana that the eonversioas era 
therefore eoBVereions of oosmaieaee. \$qr is it not possible to 


( believe that thaes eessrieee ©jnss sad by tfc# Mieiioa&riee indiaate 
7 teat corv?.a ; > ,to s ul'fsriag 

IlUSaBi'iy 1@ . S3 SJ&vftlt&SU. WoUi^d «XQ<e ©C a J, Ca w *.9 

process by vhlds a puisea is fira^o toward® C!m xstianity ? Only a 


prejudiced aind would say® fes. 

All tl ;9 s a argument® of Mr* Gcndhl are brought forth to prevent 


Christian Liissionarie: frcea converting the WntouehabAes • Me 
body will deny to Mi . Ctadhi the right to save tbs Untouchables for 
llinduAib. Eat to that eaee he should have faaakxly told Jg» Missions 
<e Stop your work, we want bow to save the Untouchable® >a»5 ourselve^ 
^iva us s chancel « It is a pity that he should not have adopted 
this boostt sods of dealing witb^tke weaac© ,os J4i8sio*^ries» 


Whatever ary bedy say say I have a® doubt all the fern toucnablea $ 

whether they are converts or not, will agree that Mr. Gaachi ha® 

been yxcissly unjust, to td$& Christian Mission®. For canturtos -tt 

-hfiYhtmy 5. , 

ia-tho Christian uis&icns have been 'their A ®h^wsr ; 3U cot 

bise&s srefugs*, 


Very few ss)p to beva any id^a cf e^at the 
C&rl&t^&n ^aeiona^ios arsidoihg t®\ remove kgno 


C^imo&n maexonarxos -r- — 

W-wWitS ra&2&® ©f Indian bussnity. foliating ■* wxll 
i'im ©£ their 'effort 1- \ 


&x-M illasss 
give earn 


lo/Kraia® iessffi iSilUcsse p. • %&■ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


491 


// 

This attitude of Ur. Gandhi need not deter either the ’ 
Missionaries or the Untouchables. Christianity has come to stay 
in India and 5 unless the Hindus In their seal for nationalism 
misuse their political^ social and economic power to. s Jpress it, 
" " will %ive in- Inert#* ia-^he-Nggae^way'''^ -Kindui«&-and 


k cx. 



A<rrs4 


ea. long, as untouchabil±ty- 


refis^iaa, and 5^®, ah UntouchaBl^s have no t\foiind another vva 
for tfe^ir ensanc ipa tS<jn^Clir i s t ianl tyN^i 11 4^-pl^pee 

fCiP- S’-gmcliu, ‘ ^ 




II. 


*. .s 


Vs 


What Christianity has achieved in India therefore bpegnes 

a proper subject for examination W)\h from the pointsof view of 

omJ. 

Christian Missions ^ss^s^H of the Untouclrables. 

That Christian Missions have been endeavouring to 

provide the corpus sanum for the people of India and to create 
VT-- 

the Mens Sana among these who have gene— into the fold is 
undeniable. It would be difficult in this piece to describe all 
the activities carried on by the Christian Missions in India. 

The work done by the Missionaries falls under five heads. 

^pek among children t Ifl ayong young men^ 'sij. T.t<jNcV 
among the masses j 1*g$c among women^x* among the sick. 

TSte extaftt of 'flic work done is tedaaeUv-eipy vast. The 
following figures will give spm idea of the scale on which the 
work for education and. relieving sickness is being 

carried on! 

(Specimen of 2 typed pages corrected in the handwriting of Dr. Ambedkar from an 
essay entitled, ‘ The Condition of trie Convert.’) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-05\vol5-06.indd MK 


SJ+YS 23-9-2013 


492 


ERRATA 


Page 

Line 

Incorrect 

Correct 

117 

foot 

note 1 

new-reports 1 

news-reports 

117 

do. 2 

approved 

appeared 

157 

29 

(un)*essentials 

essentials 

157 

foot 

The original 

delete 


note 

accordingly- Ed 


158 

8 

to cast fellowship 

to caste fellowship 

194 

8 

“Brahmanic” Sarasvati 

“Brahmanic Saraswati,” 

337 

36 

shoud have 

should hve 

347 

11 

office or profit 

office of profit 

363 

21 

Harjan Sevak Sangh 

Harijan Sevak Sangh 

379 

41 

now show 

not show 

397 

8 

rationalist who 

rationalists who 

407 

4 

nationalise 

rationalise 

412 

28 

Hinduism are to observe 

Hinduism observe 

417 

19 

all convenants 

all covenants 

420 

17 

and confer himself 

confer himself 

425 

26 

catch of Shradhanand 

caste of Shradhanand 

431 

14 

to reform, the pure 

to reform the pure 


