z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


1 



Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar 

(14th April 1891 - 6th December 1956) 



z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


Dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Vol. 14 

PART TWO 

(Section IV) 


Edited 

by 

Vasant Moon 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


4 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar : Writings and Speeches 
Vol. No. : 14 (Part-2) 


First Edition by Education Department, Govt, of Maharashtra : December 6, 1995 
Re-printed by Dr. Ambedkar Foundation : 2013 


ISBN (Set) : 978-93-5109-064-9 


Courtesy : Monogram used on the Cover page is taken from Babasaheb 
Dr. Ambedkar’s Letterhead. 


© 

Secretary 

Education Department 
Government of Maharashtra 


Price : One Set of 1 to 17 Volumes (20 Books) : ? 3000/- 


Publisher: 

Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

15, Janpath, New Delhi - 110 001 

Phone : 011-23357625, 23320589, 23320571 

Fax : 011-23320582 

Website : www.ambedkarfoundation.nic.in 


The Education Department 
Government of Maharashtra 
Bombay-400032 

for Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source 
Material Publication Committee 


Printer 

M/s. Tan Prints India Pvt. Ltd., N. H. 10, Village-Rohad, Distt. Jhajjar, Haryana 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd MK 


MK 


SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


5 




Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment 
& Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Kumar i Selja 


MESSAGE 


Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the Chief Architect of Indian Constitution was 
a scholar par excellence, a philosopher, a visionary, an emancipator and a true 
nationalist. He led a number of social movements to secure human rights to the 
oppressed and depressed sections of the society. He stands as a symbol of struggle 
for social justice. 

The Government of Maharashtra has done a highly commendable work of 
publication of volumes of unpublished works of Dr. Ambedkar, which have brought 
out his ideology and philosophy before the Nation and the world. 

In pursuance of the recommendations of the Centenary Celebrations Committee 
of Dr. Ambedkar, constituted under the chairmanship of the then Prime Minister 
of India, the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation (DAF) was set up for implementation of 
different schemes, projects and activities for furthering the ideology and message 
of Dr. Ambedkar among the masses in India as well as abroad. 

The DAF took up the work of translation and publication of the Collected Works 
of Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar published by the Government of Maharashtra 
in English and Marathi into Hindi and other regional languages. I am extremely 
thankful to the Government of Maharashtra’s consent for bringing out the works 
of Dr. Ambedkar in English also by the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation. 

Dr. Ambedkar’s writings are as relevant today as were at the time when these 
were penned. He firmly believed that our political democracy must stand on the 
base of social democracy which means a way of life which recognizes liberty, 
equality and fraternity as the principles of life. He emphasized on measuring the 
progress of a community by the degree of progress which women have achieved. 
According to him if we want to maintain democracy not merely in form, but also 
in fact, we must hold fast to constitutional methods of achieving our social and 
economic objectives. He advocated that in our political, social and economic life, 
we must have the principle of one man, one vote, one value. 

There is a great deal that we can learn from Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and 
philosophy which would be beneficial to our Nation building endeavor. I am glad 
that the DAF is taking steps to spread Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and philosophy 
to an even wider readership. 

I would be grateful for any suggestions on publication of works of Babasaheb 
Dr. Ambedkar. , 



(Kumari Selja) 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


Collected Works of Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar (CWBA) 

Editorial Board 

Kumari Selja 

Minister for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

and 

Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 

Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 

Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

Shri P. Balram Naik 

Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

Shri Sudhir Bhargav 

Secretary 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 


Shri Sanjeev Kumar 

Joint Secretary 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

and 

Member Secretary, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Viney Kumar Paul 

Director 

Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Kumar Anupam 

Manager (Co-ordination) - CWBA 


Shri Jagdish Prasad ‘Bharti’ 

Manager (Marketing) - CWBA 


Shri Sudhir Hilsayan 

Editor, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


7 


HINDU CODE BILL 

SECTION IV 

( Clause by Clause Discussion ) 

The discussion on the Hindu Code clause by clause was resumed 
from 14th December 1950. After prolonged debates, some clauses 
were cleared. Frustrated by the dilatory tactics of some of the 
members, Dr. Ambedkar submitted his resignation on 27th October 
1951. 

This Book contains the discussion in Parliament till the date of 
resignation by Dr. Ambedkar. The text of Dr. Ambedkar’s resignation 
and discussion thereon in Parliament is included in the next Volume 
i.e. Vol. No. 15 in this series. 


—EDITOR 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


8 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material 
Publication Committee 
Maharashtra State 


[. Reconstituted vide G. R. No. DBA. 1095/(381 / 95)/ Samanvay 
Higher and Technical Education and Employment Department, 
Mantralaya Annexe, Mumbai 400 032, dated 15th December 1995] 


1 . Hon’ble Shri Dattatraya Rane 
Education Minister (Higher and 
Technical Education) 

2. Hon’ble Shri Anil Deshmukh 
Minister of State for Education 

3. Shri R. S. Gavai 

4. Shri Dadasaheb Rupawate 

5. Shri Ramdas Athawale 

6. Shri Prakash Ambedkar 

7. Prof. N. D. Paul 

8. Shri Shankarrao Kharat 

9. Shri Daya Pawar 

10. Dr. Janardan Waghmare 

1 1 . Dr. Gangadhar Pantawane 

12. Dr. Y. M. Pathan 

13. Dr. Yashwant Manohar 

14. Dr. M. D. Nalawade 

15. Dr. Madhukar Kasare 

16. Dr. Prabha Ganorkar 

17. Dr. Sheshrao Meshram 

18. Prof. Keshav Meshram 

19. Prof. Ashok Godghate 

20. Shri S. S. Rege 

2 1 . Shri Vishwas Patil 

22. Shri Laxman Mane 

23. Shri Waman Nimbalkar 

24. Shri Ramesh Shinde 

25. Secretary (Higher and Technical Education) 

26. Shri Vasant Moon 
(Officer on Special Duty) 

27. Director of Education 
(Higher Education) 


President 


Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member 

Member- 

Secretary 

Convenor 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


10 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


791 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 791 

HINDU CODE — contd. 

Clause by Clause Discussion 

*Mr. Speaker: The House will now proceed with the further 
consideration of the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of 
the Hindu Law, as reported by the Select Committee. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari (Assam): Sir, before the Hon. Law Minister 
proceeds with his Bill, may I make a most humble suggestion and 
it is this : either we finish the more important and shorter Bills in 
the agenda, and then take up the Hindu Code Bill and finish it, 
or let it be understood that the Hindu Code Bill will be considered 
from now and until the Hindu Code Bill is finished no other Bill 
will be taken up. Either of the two courses must be adopted. It 
seems that some people who are very much in favour of the Hindu 
Code Bill think that they are merely playing with time by taking 
up this Bill, considering it for a short period up to one stage, and 
then putting it off further for a longer spell of time. That is rather 
unfair to everybody concerned. Therefore, my first respectful request 
is this. Let us finish these shorter and more important Bills, as for 
instance, the Preventive Detention Bill. Under that Act, a number 
of persons who were arrested, were released under the orders of the 
High Courts. They have again been re-arrested and the whole thing 
has been held up in expectation of a more comprehensive Bill which 
was promised by Government. I submit, Sir, that, in the interests 
of law and order and also in view of the fact that justice should 
be allowed to run undeterred, we must finish the most important 
legislation, namely, the Preventive Detention Bill first, then the 
Employers’ Liability Bill, and then sit down on the Hindu Code and 
finish it altogether. I hope my suggestion would be acceptable to the 
Hon. Law Minister. 

Mr. Speaker : Is this suggestion acceptable to the Hon. Minister ? 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): No. Sir. 

Mr. Speaker : So, we will proceed with the further consideration 
of the Hindu Code Bill. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal): Sir, I have a point of 
order. The Hindu Code Bill is before the House for a very long time. 

* Parliamentary Debates (Hereinafter called as P.D.), Vol. VIII, Part II, 5th February 
1951, pp. 2356-77. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


792 


792 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Meanwhile, some important things have taken place, namely, that the 
Constitution has been passed and a large number of Acts and sections 
have been declared to be ultra vires of the Constitution. The present 
Bill would seem to offend against certain definite provisions of the 
Constitution. We have enacted so many things in the Constitution that 
I was amazed to find that many relevant Acts are declared ultra vires 
There are two provisions in the Constitution : One is that legislation 
should not be discriminatory. This is enacted in article 15 ; clause (1) 
of that article says : 

“The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds 

only of religion, race, caste, sex . . . .” 

I submit that the Bill is confined to Hindus. Within that expression 
‘Hindus’, large number of classes who would not be ordinarily 
Hindus are attempted to be brought. Even apart from that, there 
are large classes who will be outside this Bill. I submit that there 
is discrimination between different castes and persons following 
different religions. The words ‘only of religion’ do not seem to make 
any difference. There is discrimination between different sections of 
our citizens on the ground of religion. The phrase ‘only of religion’ 
does not mean much, for I find there is no other reason why there is 
difference between the different religious sects, except on grounds of 
religion. That is one thing. 

The second article which I would like to submit for the consideration 
of the house is ... . 

Shri Tyagi (Uttar Pradesh): May I point out, Sir, that last time 
when we adjourned, it was decided and all agreed, — he was also a 
party — that no dilatory motions will be made. 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. He is not making any motion. He is 
only raising a point of order, according to him. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I shall be very brief, Sir. 

Shri B. Das (Orissa) : But, he is making a long speech. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : The other article to which I would like 
to refer is 25(1). It says : 

“Subject to public order, morality and health ” which do not 

mean .... 

Shrimati Durgabai (Madras) : In the name of raising a point of 
order, is the hon. Member allowed to argue the question on the merits 
of the case ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


793 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 793 

Mr. Speaker : He is arguing and he is entitled to argue ; let us not 
be impatient with the people who differ. 

Shri Sonavane (Bombay) : What is his point of order ? 

Mr. Speaker : The hon. Member should hear what he is saying. 

Shri Sonavane : Is he allowed to argue it ? 

Mr. Speaker : I cannot stop a Member, unless I know what he is 
going to speak, and I cannot know that unless he speaks out. So in 
order to know what the hon. Member is going to say. I must hear him, 
and that is the only democratic way in which we can go on. 

Shrimati Durgabai : But, will he be allowed to refer to certain 
clauses of the Bill? 

Mr. Speaker : The hon. Member knows that every person who wishes 
to argue his case is at liberty to speak ; of course, if I find an hon. 
Member is abusing the liberty or is repeating himself I shall certainly 
stop him. 

Shri Raj Bahadur (Rajasthan) : Sir, I would like to know by way of 
a ruling from you whether the hon. Member can use such derogatory 
terms as he did, when referring to certain provisions of the Constitution. 
He said that “subject to public morality, health, etc.” are meaningless 
terms. Can he make such observations ? 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : Sir, I submit that when a point of order is 
raised and when the Speaker is listening to that point of order, there 
should be no interruptions from any hon. Member. 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmed : I submitted that the words in clause 
(1) of article 25 — “Subject to public order, morality and health” do not 
really mean anything serious. I think they are the usual dreamy kind 
of safeguards which have no legal significance. The article further says : 

"... all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the 

right freely to profess, practise and propagate religion.” 

With regard to the subject of marriage, it is considered by all devout 
Hindus that marriage is part of their religious profession and practice. 
So far as I know, a Hindu thinks of marriage as part of his religion, 
and if a man has no son, he, it is believed, goes to a particular region 
in hell. 

Shri Tyagi : Order, order, I have no son. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


794 


794 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Speaker : Will the hon. member resume his seat ? Order, order. 
I want the hon. Member not to interrupt. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : In order to ensure against a particular 
kind of hell, the man should have a son, and in order to have that, 
he must marry. That is one of the ten samskaras of a Hindu. It is a 
religious practice, and in order, to have son, a man can have one wife 
or more than one. Therefore. I submit that this provision curtails the 
Fundamental Right given in article 25(1). I am not raising a point which 
is only of academic interest, for this clause has been utilized by the 
Bombay High Court recently in declaring a certain Act — Prevention of 
Bigamous Marriages Act — to be ultra vires. 

Dr. Ambedkar : By the Bombay High Court ? I am sure that is not 
correct. It was probably some magistrate. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : The question before us is whether some 
of the provisions relating to marriage may not be ultra vires of the 
Constitution. There is also the ground of discrimination, in view of article 
15(1) of the Constitution. There are numerous other articles detailing 
with minor aspects of the question, but I think, these two would suffice 
for the time being. I am well aware of the principle that the Speaker 
cannot rule out a point because the legality of it is doubtful. But these 
are real stumbling blocks and I would request you, Sir, to consider the 
legality of the Bills. As we all know, a large number of Acts and sections 
have been declared ultra vires. Even at the time the Constitution was 
passed, objections were raised that these might be declared ultra vires. 
We have enacted these Fundamental Rights and anything inconsistent 
with them; to the extent of that inconsistency, would be null and void. 
There is no way out of it. If there is any law, any Act, which is in any 
way inconsistent with these articles, those laws or Acts, to the extent of 
that inconsistency, shall be void. That is the serious question before us 
now. Should we pass an enactment which would be declared null and 
void ? Should we not reconsider the Bill in view of the structure of the 
Constitution which we have chosen to give to ourselves ? 

Sir, these are some of the matters which I venture to submit for your 
consideration . 

Mr. Speaker: I do not think I need go in detail over the serious 
points raised by the hon. Member, Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. The short 
answer which I can give to whatever he has stated is this. What he 
urges now may be true in respect of some of the provisions at the 
most, not all the provisions. And the proper procedure and time to 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


795 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 795 

deal with them would be when the particular provision which he thinks 
contravenes the Constitution, comes up for consideration, not till then, 
because to say all the provisions are of that type, and therefore there 
should be no consideration of the Bill, would be going too far. 

That is the short way in which I can dispose of all the objections 
which the hon. Member has urged. This does not mean that I agree 
with his view. But assuming that his view is correct, still the proper 
time would be when the relevant clause comes up for consideration. 
This House is perfectly competent to add to, or substract from the 
Bill as presented to the House, if the House comes to the conclusion 
that a particular provision is not proper or offends against the 
Constitution. But it cannot be decided by the Chair just at the very 
beginning. 

I do not think I need go into the merits of the arguments as to 
how far there is really any discrimination or how far marriage is 
really a question of religion and so on and so forth. 

I think we shall now proceed with the bill, clause by clause. 

Clause 2 — (Application of Code) 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava (Ajmer) : I have got an amendment 
standing in my name, proposing the insertion of a new clause 2, 
after clause 1. 

Mr. Speaker : Yes, that is right. The hon. Member may move it 
now. 

Shri Tyagi : Sir, before that, may I refer to a ruling you gave 
once, and to the ruling which you gave just now ? Once when I raised 
a point about a Bill being declared ultra vires, the ruling was that 
it was for the Courts to decide whether it was ultra vires and that 
it was not within the purview of the Chair. Sir, do you hold to that 
view now or will you use discretion in declaring certain clauses ultra 
vires or otherwise of the Constitution ? 

Mr. Speaker : I do not think I have yet any grounds for changing 
my view. If however, grounds are shown. I may reconsider the matter. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab): Sir, ordinarily clause 1 is 
taken after all the clauses are finished. In regard to the Hindu Code 
I find from the amendments to clause 1 that some of them involve 
questions of a very substantive nature. They relate to applicability 
of the Code in certain States. Many amendments to clause 1 have 
been put on the order paper and may I request you kindly to consider 
whether it would be possible to take up clause 1 first ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


796 


796 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Speaker : The reason for taking up clause 1 at the end is to see 
that it may be properly worded, after seeing the final form of the various 
provisions in the legislation. The hon. Member will see that sub-clause (1) 
of clause 1 says as to what the name of the Bill shall be : sub-clause (2) 
deals with the territorial extent of this legislation and sub-clause (3) 
speaks about the date from which the Bill will come into force. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Territorial extent is a substantive 
question. 

Mr. Speaker: Even in regard to that, after going through the provisions 
of the Bill it may be possible for us to see more clearly. As to whether 
the provisions of the Bill should apply to all parts of India or exceptions 
should be made in respect of certain provisions in respect to certain 
States or areas. To my mind, it appears more advantageous to take 
clause 1 at the end, for then the House will have a more clear picture 
as to what the provisions of the Bill are. That is a better procedure and 
we shall proceed with clause 2. 

As regards Pandit M. B. Bhargava’s amendment, it more or less 
seeks to amend clause 1 and he wants to put in a new condition for the 
application of the provisions of the Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is really an amendment to clause 1. 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava: I may be allowed to explain. 

Mr. Speaker : The amendment says : 

“That this Code or only such part of it shall come into force if and 

when it is ratified on a referendum by majority of the Hindu electorate 

of Parliament.” 

That is, really speaking, an amendment to sub-clause (3) of clause 1, 
though he places it as a separate new clause. No further arguments are 
necessary and I shall proceed with clause 2. 

Shri Sarwate (Madhya Bharat): Will the official amendments be 
moved first or will mine be taken up first ? 

Mr. Speaker : I am going by the order so far as the provisions of the 
Bill go. The official amendments will come later on. 

Shrimati Durgabai : If the official amendments are moved first they 
may cover the points to be raised later by non-official amendments. 

Mr. Speaker : We will go by the order. 

Dr. Ambedkar : May I make a suggestion in the interest of economy 
of time .... 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


797 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 797 

Shri Tyagi: Withdraw the Bill : that is the best economy of time. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That would be too much of an economy. If you look 
at the various amendments which stand on the order paper you will see 
that most of the amendments are mere variants of one another. There 
is no amendment which is very substantially different from the other 
amendments. I was therefore suggesting whether it would not be a proper 
procedure to permit Members to move their amendments and then to 
have a general discussion rather than to permit each amendment to be 
moved, have a debate on it and then to dispose of it, thereafter have 
another amendment moved, have a debate on it and then to dispose of 
it. I was thinking that in the interests of economy of time the procedure 
I was suggesting might appeal to you. 

Mr. Speaker: In fact, we have been following that procedure. Where 
amendments involve a common point, all the amendments are moved and 
there is a common discussion. That is the practice which we have been 
following in the past and therefore, I shall follow that practice here too. 

Shri Sarwate : I beg to move : 

For clause 2, substitute : 

“2. Application of Code. — (1) This Code applies to all Hindus. 

(2) The expression ‘Hindu’ in this Code, shall, unless otherwise 
provided, mean a citizen of India. 

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Special marriage Act, 
1872 (III of 1872), this Code shall apply to Hindus, as defined in that 
Act, and whose marriages have not been solemnized under the provisions 
of that Act prior to the commencement of this Code.” 

Mr. Speaker : May I suggest one thing more. Those amendments 
that are printed, as well as others too, have been circularised. So hon. 
Members may only mention the number of the amendment they propose 
to move and I shall take it that it has been moved. All the amendments 
relating to one clause and one subject will be moved and discussed. 

Shri Tyagi : The point which the amendments seek to amend will 
be discussed separately. 

Mr. Speaker : Yes. 

The Minister of State for Transport and Railways (Shri 
Santhanam): Sir, is it in order to go against the fundamentals of 
the Hindu Code itself. The amendment seeks to apply the Code to all 
Christians, Muslims and others. Does it not go beyond the Code itself? 
I would like a ruling from you, Sir, on that subject. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


798 


798 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Speaker : Let the amendments be moved first. 

Shri Tyagi : The amendment seeks to Hinduise the Muslims, which 
is against the law or Constitution. Everybody has been guaranteed the 
liberty of practising his religion and to bring the Muslims and Christians 
also under the Hindu Code will mean interfering with their religion. 

Mr. Speaker : Let the amendments be moved. 

Shri Tyagi : This amendment has been moved and therefore it is 
out of order. 

Shri Indra Vidyavachaspati (Uttar Pradesh) : I beg to move: 

For clause 2, substitute: 

“2. This Code applies to all Indians irrespective of their religion, 
caste or creed”. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I beg to move: 

For clause 2, substitute: 

“2. Subject to the provisions of section 1 this Code applies — 

(a) to all persons who are Hindus, Buddhists, Jains or Sikhs by religion ; 

(b) to any other person who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsee, or a 
Jew by religion ; 

(c) to every woman who married any person who was not a Muslim, 
Christian, Parsee or a Jew by religion ; 

(d) to any child legitimate or illegitimate one of whose parents was a 
person who was not a Muslim, Christian, Parsee or a Jew by religion ; 

(e) to a convert to any religion except the Muslim, Christian, Parsee 
or Jew by religion.” 

Shri Jhunjhunwala (Bihar) : I beg to move : 

For clause 2, substitute: 

“ 2. Application of Code — This Code applies to all the citizens of India 
that is Bharat, irrespective of their caste, creed and irrespective of their 
belonging to or professing any religion.” 

Dr. Ambedkar: I beg to move: 

In clause 2, — 

(1) in sub-clause (1), — 

(i) in part (a), for “ Hindus, that is to say, all persons professing 
the Hindu religion” substitute “persons who are Hindus by religion” ; 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


799 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 799 

(ii) in part (d), for “ Hindu religion” substitute “ Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina 
or Sikh religion” ; 

(2) omit sub-clause (4). 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I beg to move: 

(i) In part (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, for “ Hindus, that is to say, 
all persons professing the Hindu religion” substitute “ persons who are 
Hindus by religion”. 

(ii) Omit part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2. 

(iii) For part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, substitute: 

“(b) to all persons who are Buddhists, Jains or Sikhs by religion”. 

(iv) For part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, substitute: 

“(b) to any person who is a Jaina by religion 

(v) In part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, for “Jaina or Sikh”, substitute 
“or Jaina”. 

Sardar Hukam Singh (Punjab) : I beg to move: 

In part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, omit “or Sikh”. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I beg to move: 

(i) In part (c)(i) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, after “ illegitimate” insert: 
“who, if he has attained the age of eighteen years, is himself a Hindu and”. 

(ii) In part (c)(i) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, for “whose parents are 
Hindus” substitute “whose parents are or have been Hindus”. 

(iii) In part (c) (ii) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, after “belongs or 
belonged” insert “and who, if he has attained the age of eighteen years, 
is himself a Hindu”. 

Shri S. P. Misra (Uttar pradesh): I beg to move: 

After part (c) (ii) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, add: 

“(iii) to any abandoned child brought up as a member of the community, 
group or family to which such parent belongs 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I beg to move: 

For part (d) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, substitute: 

“(d) to a convert to the Hindu religion, subject to his rights and liabilities 
before his conversion.” 

Babu Gopinath Singh (Uttar Pradesh): I beg to move: 

After part (d) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, add : 

“(e) to a Muslim or Christian converted from Buddhism, Jainism, 
Sikhism or Hinduism in his life time”. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


800 


800 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I beg to move: 

Omit sub -clause (2) of clause 2. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : I beg to move: 

In sub -clause (2) of clause 2, after “ Parsi” insert “ Sikh”. 

Shri Brajeshwar Prasad (Bihar): I beg to move: 

After sub-clause (2) of clause 2, insert: 

“(2A) This Code also applies to any woman professing any religion 
who has married a Hindu, Buddhist, Jain or Sikh.” 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I beg to move : 

(i) Omit sub-clause (3) of clause 2. 

(ii) Omit sub-clause (4) of clause 2. 

(iii) After sub -clause (4) of clause 2, add : 

“ (5) Notwithstanding anything in this section this Code shall apply 
only to such areas or to such persons or classes of persons in any 
State from such time or by such stages as the State Legislature may 
from time to time by Act provide.” 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : I beg to move : 

To clause 2, add the proviso: 

“Provided, however, that notwithstanding anything contained in 
the above clauses, this Code shall not apply to any person, unless 
such person got his name registered with such authority, and in such 
manner, as may be hereafter prescribed by Parliament, within one 
year after this Code comes into force and in case of a minor within 
one year after such a minor attains majority.” 

Mr. Speaker: I called out each Member who has tabled his amendment 
or amendments and I find that Shri Shiv Charan Lai and Prof. K. K. 
Bhattacharya were absent when called. But, as we are following a 
procedure of calling out the number of the amendment it is possible that 
these two Members may not have expected that they would have been 
called so soon as that to move their amendments. Though I am very 
clear that they should have been in their seats when the Bill is taken 
up for discussion, as we are starting this procedure in the beginning. I 
am thinking of permitting them to move their amendments later on if 
they turn up in the House and wish to move them during the course of 
discussion on this particular clause. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh) : Sir, there are two amendments 
of which I have given notice. One of them is an amendment to Shri 
Jhunjhunw ala’s amendment No. 18 in Supplementary List No. 1. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 801 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 801 

Mr. Speaker: Is the hon. Member moving further substantial 
amendments ? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: No. I may be so called but not No. 2. 

Mr. Speaker : No 2 of course is an amendment to the amendment 
of Shri Jhunjhunwala. That I am accepting for moving. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : So far as No. 1 is concerned, it does so happen 
that it has been given the shape of an absolutely original amendment 
though I had given it to the Notice Office in the form of an amendment 
to Mr. Jhunjunwala’s amendment No. 13. To put it in a better form 
the office has given it as a separate amendment. Therefore, I hope 
you will admit it. The whole thing will be open to discussion and the 
admission of this will not in any way interfere with the proper disposal 
of the subject. 

Mr. Speaker : It is not a question of disposal. If I were to permit 
amendments at the last minute, they will be coming in even till the 
last stage of voting. Therefore, I am unwilling to waive. . . . 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Sir, I was making this submission only in view 
of the special circumstances of the case. Originally I had put in the 
first amendment as an amendment to Shri Jhunjhunwala’s amendment 
No. 13 in Supplementary List No. 1. But then to give it a better form 
the office thought it might be put as a separate substantial amendment. 
If the Chair is so pleased it can be taken in the original form. 

Mr. Speaker: Very well. As it is a change in form only I will permit 
him to move it. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : I beg to move : 

(i) For clause 2, substitute : 

“2. Application of Code . — This Code or any part or parts thereof 
applies to all the citizens of India that is Bharat, who after attaining 
the age of majority, declare in writing that they shall be governed 
by this Code or any part or parts thereof, as the case may be, and 
get such declaration registered in accordance with rules prescribed 
for the purpose by the Central Government.” 

I also beg to move: 

(ii) In the amendment proposed by Shri Banarsi Prasad 

Jhunjhunwala, in the proposed proviso to clause 2, for the words 

beginning with the words “unless such person” to the end, substitute: 


“unless such person, after attaining the age of majority, 
declares in writing that he or she, as the case may be, shall be 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


802 


802 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

governed by this Code, and gets such declaration registered in 
accordance with rules prescribed for the purpose by the Central 
Government.” 

Mr. Speaker : Amendments moved : 

1. For clause 2, substitute: 

“2. Application of Code. — (1) This Code applies to all Hindus. 

(2) The expression ‘ Hindu’ in this Code shall, unless otherwise 
provided, mean a citizen of India. 

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Special Marriage 
Act, 1872 (III of 1872), this Code shall apply to Hindus, as defined 
in that Act, and whose marriages have not been solemnized under 
the provisions of that Act prior to the commencement of this Code.” 

2. For clause 2, substitute: 

“2. This Code applies to all Indians irrespective of their religion, 
caste or creed.” 

3. For clause 2, substitute: 

“2. Subject to the provisions of section 1 this Code applies — 

(a) to all persons who are Hindus, Buddhists, Jains or Sikhs by 
religion ; 

(b) to any other person who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsee, or 
a Jew by religion ; 

(c) to every woman who married any person who was not a Muslim, 
Christian, Parsee or a Jew by religion ; 

(d) to any child legitimate or illegitimate one of whose parents was a 
person who was not a Muslim, Christian, Parsee or a Jew by religion ; 

(e) to a convert to any religion except the Muslim, Christian, Parsee 
or Jew by religion.” 

4. For clause 2, substitute: 

“2. Application of Code. — This Code applies to all the citizens of 
India that is Bharat, irrespective of their caste, creed and irrespective 
of their belonging to or professing any religion.” 

5. In clause 2, — 

(1) in sub-clause (1), — 

(i) in part (a), for “Hindus, that is to say, all persons professing 
the Hindu religion” substitute “persons who are Hindus by religion” ; 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


803 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 803 

(ii) in part (d), for “ Hindu religion” substitute “ Hindu, Buddhist, 
Jaina or Sikh religion”; 

(2) Omit sub -clause (4). 

6. In part (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, for, “Hindus, that is to 
say, all persons professing the Hindu religion” substitute “persons who 
are Hindus by religion”. 

7. Omit part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2. 

8. For part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, substitute : 

“(b) to all persons who are Buddhists, Jainas or Sikhs by religion 

9. For part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, substitute : 

“(b) to any person who is a Jaina by religion”. 

10. In part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, for “Jaina or Sikh”, 
substitute “or, Jaina”. 

11. In part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, omit “or Sikh”. 

12. In part (c) (i) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, after “illegitimate” 
insert : — 

“ who, if he has attained the age of eighteen years, is himself a 
Hindu and”. 

13. In part (c) (i) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, for “ whose parents are 
Hindus” substitute “ whose parents are or have been Hindus”. 

14. In part (c) (ii) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, after “ belongs or 
belonged” insert “and who, if he has attained the age of eighteen years, 
is himself a Hindu”. 

15. After part (c) (ii) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, add: 

“(iii) to any abandoned child brought up as a member of the community, 
group or family to which such parent belongs;”. 

16. For part (d) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, substitute : 

“(d) to a convert to the Hindu religion, subject to his rights and 
liabilities before his conversion.” 

17. After part (d) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, add: 

“(e) to a Muslim or Christian converted from Buddhism, Jainism, 
Sikhism or Hinduism in his life time.” 

18. Omit sub-clause (2) of clause 2. 

19. In sub-clause (2) of clause 2, after “Parsi” insert “Sikh”. 

20. After sub-clause (2) of clause 2, insert: 

“(2A) This Code also applies to any woman professing any religion 
who has married a Hindu, Buddhist, Jain or Sikh.” 

21. Omit sub-clause (3) of clause 2. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


804 


804 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

22. Omit sub-clause (4) of clause 3. 

23. After sub-clause (4) of clause 2, add: 

“(5) Notwithstanding anything in this section this Code shall apply 
only to such areas or to such persons or classes of persons in any State 
from such time or by such stages as the State Legislature may from 
time to time by Act provide.” 

24. To clause 2, add the proviso: 

“Provided, however, that notwithstanding anything contained in 
the above clauses, ‘this Code shall not apply to any person, unless 
such person got his name registered with such authority, and in such 
manner, as may be hereafter prescribed by Parliament, within one 
year after this Code comes into force, and in case of a minor within 
one year after such a minor attains majority.” 

25. For clause 2, substitute : 

“2. Application of Code . — This Code or any part or parts thereof 
applies to all the citizens of India that is Bharat, who after attaining 
the age of majority, declare in writing that they shall be governed by 
this Code or any part or parts thereof, as the case may be, and get 
such declaration registered in accordance with rules prescribed for the 
purpose by the Central Government.” 

26. In the amendment proposed by Shri Banarsi Prasad 
Jhunjhunwala, in the proposed proviso to clause 2, for the words 
beginning with the words “ unless such person” to the end, substitute : 

“unless such person, after attaining the age of majority, declares in 
writing that he or she, as the case may be, shall be governed by this 
Code, and gets such declaration registered in accordance with rules 
prescribed for the purpose by the Central Government.” 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, I would like to suggest a shortcut. 
There are a large number of amendments, though governing almost 
the same matter. I think if all these matters are discussed together 
there would be confusion and I think, from experience, that we 
will not get replies to our points. If we consider separately, we can 
curtail our speeches to prevent repetition. I suggest this only as a 
matter of opinion. 

Mr. Speaker : If we are all determined not to repeat the same 
thing over again, we need not be very much afraid of repetitions. Of 
course, the Chair may be put to a much greater strain in watching 
that there are no repetitions, but the Chair will try its best to do so. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


805 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 805 

Dr. Ambedkar : And apply sanctions to Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad ! 

Shri Sarwate : Sir, at the outset an objection has been raised 
that my amendment would enlarge the scope of the Bill. In the 
course of my speech, I shall try to show that if it does so at all, it 
is not being inconsistent either with the object of this Bill or with 
the provisions of the Constitution. 

[Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava in the Chair.] 

As far as I know, there has been no one definition of “Hindu”. 
The connotation and denotation of the term “Hindu” has varied 
from time to time and from place to place. Possibly, there would be 
a time when it would come to mean what I have suggested in my 
amendment. I may quote certain instances where the term “Hindu” 
is interpreted variously. Satyarthaprakash, I am told, does say that 
“Hindu” means : “whosoever resides in India”. Savarkar, reformer 
of Bombay has suggested that whosoever is born in India and who 
holds her as his sacred land is a Hindu. He has suggested: 

3TT f*m Irrsj ptp mm t-iIpcm i 

ftTO WT'diMcl , -^p=f T>JrT: II 

That is to say, one who considers India to be his homeland and 
also as his sacred land should be considered as Hindu. I need 
not point out that in America and also probably in South Africa 
everybody who comes from India is known as “Hindu”. Therefore, my 
amendment does not seek to do anything novel but is in conformity 
with the interpretation which has been tried to put on this term 
“Hindu”. Again, I may point out that in this Bill itself, the term 
“Hindu” is not restricted to Hindu law, whatever that may mean. 
In sub-clause (a) of the definitions, it is said to apply: 

“to all Hindus, that is to say, to all persons professing the Hindu 

religion”, 

and in (b): 

“to any person who is Buddhist, Jain or Sikh by religion”. 

So, this Bill seeks to extend the provisions to Hindus plus Sikhs 
plus Buddhists plus Jains. I need not go into the history of the Hindu 
religion. Jainism was certainly at one time opposed to and contradictory 
to the Hindu religion, if that means Sanatana Vedic Dharma, Whereas 
Sanatana Vedic Dharma relied on the Vedas Jainism did not rely on 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


806 


806 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the Vedas. Therefore, Jain and Hindu Sanatana Vedic Dharmas were 
entirely different religions. 

The House then adjourned for Lunch till Half Past Two of the Clock. 


The House re-assembled after Lunch at Half Past Two of the Clock. 

[Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava in the Chair.] 

Shri Sarwate: When the House rose for lunch I was trying to 
show that in the Bill along with Hindus, persons of other religions 
are also sought to be included — religions which were contradictory 
to and opposed to Hindu religion, i.e., Sanatana Vedic Dharma. For 
instance, Buddhism was against Hinduism ; so also was Jainism. But 
these two religions have been included in the Hindu Code Bill. So, 
if the mover of the Bill is entitled to include certain religions other 
than Hinduism, then I am entitled to move that certain other religions 
may also be included and in doing so I think I shall not be outside 
the scope of the Bill. 

I was going further to show that the Bill under discussion also 
seeks to codify and reform Hindu law, if I remember aright, it has 
been stated in the Statement of Objects and Reasons. Possibly that 
has been done to obviate or remove any possible difficulty that the 
Constitution may bring in at this stage or later on. What I mean 
is this. Article 25 of the Constitution lays down that all citizens of 
India are equally entitled to freedom of conscience and the right 
freely to profess, practise and propagate religion. If as man were free 
to practise his own religion, then he would certainly be at liberty to 
marry according to the tenets of his religion. But what is sought to 
be done by this Bill is that he will be forced to marry in a particular 
way. The principles laid down in this Bill may be entirely opposed to 
the tenets of his religion. I have a feeling that objection to this may 
probably be sought to be covered by the subsequent clause of article 
25 which reads : 

“(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any existing 
law or prevent the State from making any law — 

(a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or 
other secular activity which may be associated with religious practice ; 

(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open of 
Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and 
sections of Hindus.” 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


807 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 807 

By my amendment I want to reform what is Hindu religion. I 
want to reform Hinduism by widening its scope to all those persons 
who are citizens of India, including Christians, Parsis, Jews, etc. 

Now, Sir, what is Hindu law ? Hindu law is said to be based on 
Shruti and Smriti, that is Vedas. Further it is said that that is 
not the only source. The other source is the enactment by proper 
legislature or proper authority. So, let us say that enactment plus 
Vedas is equal to Hindu law. If X represents Shruti and Smriti and 

Y represents enactment, Hindu law is equal to X plus Y. The value 
of X in the beginning was 100 and that of Y zero. But as time went 
on encroachments were made by enactments one by one with the 
result that the position was completely changed. 

The very basis of the Hindu religion is the caste system and 
secondly the particular way in which marriage is held. It is held to 
be sacred ; it is held to be sacramental and therefore it is said to 
be indissoluble. It cannot be dissolved. There cannot be a divorce 
according to the strict Sanatana Vedic Dharma as practised by 
orthodox Hindus. But one by one these fundamentals are being 
removed. For instance, divorce is allowed . In certain cases castes 
have been totally ignored and in this Bill it has been said that 
there will be no caste. So this Bill takes away the whole basis of 
‘Hinduism’ according to the Sanatana Vedic Dharma. What this 
Bill seeks to do is that whereas previously X was hundred and 

Y was zero and the total was hundred, X is sought to be reduced 
to zero and Y raised to hundred. They are exactly reversing the 
position. While once the Shruti and Smriti was the whole source 
and enactment nil, now the enactment would be the whole source 
and Shruti and Smriti nil. Therefore, what I am now saying is 
that instead of giving this benefit only to those who are Sanatana 
Vedic Dharmas it should be extended to all. That would be doing 
on the professed lines of the Bill. My object is to give equality to 
all persons who are inside the limits of India. I am neither partial 
to the Hindus, nor to Sikhs, nor to anybody else. 

It may perhaps be pointed out that I am trying to extend the scope 
of the Bill to persons who were not examined; for instance, Christians 
and Parsis were not examined, and that it would be unfair. My answer 
is that it would be unfair to include the Sikhs either because they 
were not examined. So, in point of fairness there is not much to choose 
between the provisions of the original Bill and the amendment which 
I am seeking to move. The logical course would be to examine those 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


808 


808 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

persons who were not examined previously and to get their opinion. If 
necessary the Bill may be held over or returned to do this. 

The chief claim of this Bill is said to be this that it is based on a very 
good sense of fairplay, justice and equity. Suppose it is said, for instance, 
a person has three sons and three daughters. If he has affection for his 
sons, he has equal affection for his daughters. If the sons are to inherit 
because they are born of the parents, it follows that the daughters also 
having been born of the parents they should also take the inheritance. 
That is the only reason that can be advanced for giving the inheritance 
to the daughter, namely, that she is born of her parents, and therefore 
she necessarily ought to get a share in the property of the father. In a 
way it is right. Then it should be right not only in me case of Hindus 
but of Muslims and Sikhs also; it should be so in the case of Christians 
and others. Therefore, if the law has to be amended it should be made 
applicable not only to Hindus but to all citizens who happen to be within 
our jurisdiction and for whom we can legislate. 

And here I have a very good support. I shall just quote what 
Dr. Ambedkar himself has said at a previous stage of the Bill — I am 
quoting from page 3651 of the report of the proceedings of the House : 

“ If my hon. friend’s alternative was that there ought not to be 
communal laws of inheritance and communal laws of marriage but there 
are to be a common Civil Code applying to all sections, all communities, 
in fact applying to citizens without discrimination as to religion, cast or 
creed, I am certainly one with him.” 

He said this in the course of the discussion on the Hindu Code Bill 
at some previous stage. 

An. Hon. Member : He has changed his opinion. 

Shri Sarwate : He should keep his word. 

There is also a provision in the Constitution in my favour, and that 
is article 44 which says: 

“ The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a uniform Civil 
Code throughout the territory of India.” 

A Civil Code necessarily means a Code which deals with marriage, 
inheritance, adoption and so on. The scope of the Civil Code is co-terminous 
with and almost the same as that of the Hindu Code Bill. The article 

in the Constitution says that “the State shall endeavour ”, which 

is being made by this amendment. So it is but proper that the earliest 
opportunity should be taken to put this provision of the Constitution 
into effect and Dr. Ambedkar should be the first person to accept my 
amendment. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


809 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 809 

While the discussion on this Code was going on in the previous 
session, some of my Muslim friends, and also some of my Parsi friends, 
expressed their entire satisfaction and were very loud in praising the 
provisions of this Code. I would welcome them and appeal to them 
to support me. When they consider that the provisions are so good 
and reasonable, they should follow up their convictions by similar 
speeches as the one which I am at present making, namely, that 
the Code should be made applicable to all. 

I say that the expression “Hindu” in this Code shall, unless 
otherwise provided, mean a citizen of India. I have put in the 
expression “unless otherwise provided” for this reason, namely, that 
if certain provisions of this law are not applicable to people of certain 
religions, if for instance they think that adoption is not necessary 
for them, they can move that for the purposes of adoption “Hindu” 
should not include, for instance, a Muslim or a Christian. The phrase 
“unless otherwise provided” would show that it is sufficiently elastic. 
My definition would be sufficiently elastic to enable every religion 
to adapt the Code to its own tenets or whatever hon. Members 
think that their religion requires them to do. So there should be no 
difficulty in this way either. For instance the Roman Catholics think 
that divorce is not allowable in their case. If they are convinced they 
can say that for purposes of divorce “Hindu” should not include a 
Roman Catholic. 

According to this Code there can be two ways of marriage, 
sacramental and civil. Sacramental marriage would mean a marriage 
done according to religion. It may be any religion — It may be Hindu, 
Jain, Christian. That does not come in the way either. For instance 
there are necessary ceremonies in the Sanatana Vedic Dharma. What 
I am suggesting is that people of those religions need not be afraid 
that their whole religion would be nullified. 

Shri Tyagi: What about those who are already married according 
to another Code ? 

Shri Sarwate : My hon. friend Mr. Tyagi may suggest the necessary 
amendments at the proper stage for that. 

I, therefore, suggest that my amendment meets the provisions of 
the Constitution ; it is in conformity with what has been said by 
the Mover of the Bill, the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar ; it meets also all the 
claims which have been made for this Bill, those of logic, justice and 
fairplay. I therefore commend my amendment to the House and to 
the Mover of the Bill for acceptance. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 810 

810 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Chairman: There are some amendments from the hon. 
Member Shri Gopinath Singh. They have come today. The rule in 
this House has been that unless the hon. Member in charge of the 
Bill consents, the Chair does not allow them. The notice has been 
received only today; I would ask the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar if he is 
willing to accept them. 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have not got copies of those amendments at 
all and I cannot say anything. 

*Shri Indra Vidyavachaspati: ( English translation of the Hindi 
Speech) Sir, my amendment is that the Hindu Code Bill when 
passed, should be made applicable to every Indian. There should 
be no distinction of caste, creed or religion therein. This is my 
amendment. In the beginning, I would like to submit as to why I 
am speaking today, I have been a member of this Parliament for 
one year. But I have not taken a single minute of the House. It was 
because our Hon. Speaker had said that every minute of parliament 
costs fifty rupees. Thus I have saved thousands of rupees of this 
Parliament, but I am not inclined to make a saving today. The 
reason is that I have a fear lurking in my mind. The fear is that I 
feel there would be difficulties both if this bill is passed and if it is 
not. I am a staunch social reformer and I want that there should be 
such legislations for social reforms. The State has a right to frame 
laws for making reforms in the society. Therefore, what I want to 
point out is that it cannot be said that it is an interference with 
any religion. On the other hand I am of the opinion that the State 
and the legislature must take steps to provide for such legislations 
relating to social reforms. I do not say that this Bill should not 
be passed but I am afraid, this bill will not be passed in the form 
in which it has been presented although Dr. Ambedkar and our 
Prime Minister have repeatedly expressed the view that it would 
be passed. I think even in a long session as the Budget Session, 
we will not be able to pass it unless the guillotine is used. But 
it is not proper to use guillotine in the case of such bills which 
affect the whole country. So, this is the first difficulty. The other 
difficulty is that by passing the Bill in its present form, we will 
give encouragement to an evil which must not be there and against 
which we have always stood up. And that evil is communalism. If 
we pass the Hindu Code Bill, this evil of communalism will raise 
its head for ever. As this Bill is not applicable to all sections of the 


P.D., Vol. VIII, Part II, 5th February 1951, pp. 2387-92. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


811 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 811 

population. It will definitely give rise to communalism. If the Bill 
is not passed. I fear the avenue of making social reforms through 
legislation may be closed for ever. I have very little hope of its being 
passed but if it is passed the feeling of communalism will arise and 
what should have been a boon will turn into a curse. Therefore, when 
I saw these obstacles and difficulties in the way of social reforms. I 
decided to say something. I would clearly submit that I am in favour 
of making laws relating to social reforms. I do not want to go into the 
details of the proposed reforms, but I would like to say a few words 
on subjects like polygamy. I want that monogamy should be enforced 
by law in our country not only for Hindus but for all sections of the 
population. In the same way, I also say that there should be justice 
for women and their economic rights should be safe-guarded. I do not 
believe that only Hindu women are oppressed. There are women of 
other communities as well who are also oppressed. These atrocities 
must go. It is better if the society itself removes these atrocities, 
otherwise law must intervene. If a Constitution can be enacted on 
principles of equality and equity for the whole of the country, why not 
laws be made for the entire society ? In the same way I think, there is 
the question of divorce. We hear many quotations from the Shastras 
against it. I do not want to discuss that subject but I can say on the 
basis of Dharma Shastras as that it is wrong to say that this has not 
been mentioned in the shastras. Everything for and against a certain 
subject is given there. There are 137 Smritis. In the principal one i.e. 
Manusmrit it is written : 

Vidvadbhi Sevitah Sadbhirnityamadwesharagibhih 

Hridayenabhyanugyatoyo dharmastannibodhata Sannibodh. 

(meaning thereby the Dharma is that which is constantly practised 
by the good, the learned and those who are devoid of prejudice and 
attachment and which is in full accord with the heart). 

Manu has himself said that there were Smritis before him. So these 
Smrities are in existence for a very long time. It is wrong to say that 
there should be no reforms in our society. It will put an end to all 
the progress in our country. All necessary reforms in the society must 
be made. I will not go into details because the Bill will be discussed 
clause by clause later on and amendments can be made at that stage. 
Therefore I am not in favour of postponing it. But one thing seems 
certain, that many difficulties will arise if it is passed in this very 
form. In my opinion, the government may enact an Indian Code, but 
it should be applicable to the whole country. The reforms should be 
made for the whole of India. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


812 


812 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I will now point out the disadvantages of its being applicable to 
Hindus alone. Firstly according to the Constitution of free India, we do 
not want communalism to grow. Ours is a secular state. Under these 
circumstances, the Government cannot make any law for a particular 
community. The lawyers can discuss a lot on this subject, but as a 
layman, I would only submit that in a State where religion has not 
been given any place or consideration, it is against all justice to frame 
laws for the followers of a particular religion alone, and such a step 
will always encourage sectarianism. 

This Bill originated in the days of British rule. During that time, 
Hindus and Muslims were used to be kept apart from each other and 
everything was done to encourage communalism. Thus, the Bill started 
in that form. I want to submit as to why this remnant of the British 
period be allowed to stick on while we have thrown out all others so 
that there may be no discrimination against a particular section of 
the society. 

Shrimati Durgabai : On a point of order, Sir I understand the hon. 
Member is raising the question of competency of this Parliament... 

Some Hon. Members : No. no. 

Shrimati Durgabai: At least that is what I understood him to say. If 
that is so, I wish to tell him that that issue had already been decided. 

Mr. Chairman : I am sorry the hon. Member has not understood the 
point the Hon. Member was making. He never said that this House is 
not competent but, on the contrary, he holds that this House is fully 
competent. 

Shri Indra Vidyavachaspati : Let me finish all that I have to say 
and then perhaps there will be no doubt in this regard. 

By this Bill the Government want to achieve a big thing, that is 
they want to remove all injustice that is done to the women. I do not 
think there is any Indian social reformer who will not co-operate with 
the Government in this matter or who will not support this move. 
But I would like to ask one thing from those who want to remove 
this injustice done to the Hindu women. This is also an injustice that 
a man can marry four women at a time but a woman is not allowed 
to do so. This is an injustice. It Must go. Is this injustice done to 
Hindu women alone and not to Muslim women also ? I ask my sisters 
whether they will tolerate that justice should be done only to Hindu 
women and not to Muslim women ? This injustice done to them must 
also be removed. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


813 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 813 

How it can be tolerated that injustice may continue to be perpetrated 
on them. Why do not the Government include them in this Law ? It 
is said that if any such Laws for Muslims and others are enacted, it 
would mean interference in their religion. If the enactment of social laws 
is interference in their religion, how this law is not an interferene in 
religion of Hindus also. We therefore should make such a law which may 
be applicable to all. If it is interference in religion, it is for all. I am of 
opinion that it is not an interference. The law should be applicable to all 
alike, Muslims, Sikhs and Christians. There should be no discrimination. 
There should be no discrimination about it. It is as much our duty to 
do justice to Muslim women and women of other religions as we do 
justice to Hindu women. Therefore the present form of this Bill should 
not be there. 

There is another aspect. We may have to face some difficulties regarding 
this enactment. As we know in Bombay the Bigamy Act was challenged 
in the High Court and the High Court declared it ultra vires. The news 
has appeared in the newspapers also. 

Several Hon. Members : Not High Court, Lower Court. 

Shri Indra Vidyavachaspati : Well, let it be Lower Court. Such 
difficulties may arise. This Act will be challenged in the court. In his 
recent statement in Bombay, Dr. Deshmukh had invited our attention 
towards this aspect. We will come across such a difficulty if we pass this 
bill and if it is challenged and the issue is referred to High Court or 
Supreme Court then we may have to face new difficulties. Such difficulties 
may arise if we make it applicable only to Hindus. The Government 
may well realise that more than sufficient time has passed since this 
Bill has been introduced and why it has not been possible to make any 
progress in it. Even the Reformist Hindu Organisations do not support 
it fully. Even the Reformers are moving amendments to it. To my mind 
the reason for all this is that we have adopted a wrong measure for 
social reforms. If a few lines are put in wrongly, there are two ways to 
correct them. In the first instance we may draw a line in between them 
or secondly rub them out and draw a fresh straight line instead. But 
what is being done is that one line is joined with the other line, thus 
forced insertions are being made. In my opinion the best course would 
be to withdraw it for reconsideration and introduce such a revised Bill 
that may have full support. As we have set up uniform political order 
and economic order in the same way we should introduce such a social 
order that may be applicable to the whole of the country. Such a Bill 
should be brought forward. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


814 


814 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

If Hindu women face some difficulties, the Muslim women also face 
them. When we have framed such a comprehensive Constitution and 
set up a uniform economic order for the whole of the country then it 
is not very difficult to draft such a Bill. Remember, truth is eternal; 
place, time and person cannot prove obstacle in it. If this principle 
holds good, then it should be true for all, and if it is not true then 
it cannot be true for anybody. I think the intention of Government 
is good. It would be better if that is utilised for the benefit of the 
whole country. This Bill should be redrafted and introduced here. 

I want to submit one thing more, that here we faced the greatest 
of legal difficulties and complications, all those have been solved 
and many laws have been passed because of the fact that today 
the country wants to make progress on the basis of equality and 
freedom, and is willing to accept all those laws as are based on 
equality. If a Bill is drafted on this principle and made applicable 
to the whole of the country surely it would be accepted. This is my 
view point. But this Bill is not so. Although the Government are 
very hopeful, it is very good that they are optimist, but they will find 
many difficulties in getting this bill passed, it will require a three 
months’ session, even then with great difficulty they will be able to 
get it passed and then even after that there are many obstacles to 
be faced. Even if this Bill is got passed we will have to face several 
difficulties before it is enforced, and we will be involved in legal 
difficulties. I, therefore, will ask those who have framed this Bill, 
and especially Dr. Ambedkar, who has laboured hard for it and has 
worked with firm determination, to broaden their outlook, and with 
their abilities of legal profession, should make such laws as may be 
applicable to all Indians instead of Hindus alone. The present minor 
drawbacks in the Bill would be removed automatically as the path 
of truthfulness is straight. 

[Mr. Speaker in the Chair] 

I also wish to say this to my hon. sisters that as they want that 
full justice should be meted out to Hindu women, similarly full justice 
should also be done to Muslim women and women of other religions. 
They may argue as to who would accept them. But in Turkey reforms 
have taken place; it is a Muslim country, and there all have accepted 
those reforms. As these reforms have been accepted in that Muslim 
country, similarly here also these reforms will be accepted. Therefore 
our sisters should adopt the right course and accept these reforms 
without making any discrimination among themselves. Only then we 
will be able to get it passed and if it is passed under such circumstances, 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 815 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 815 

then such difficulties will not crop up. Otherwise we have great difficulties 
before us and if we get it passed even then we will have to face many 
difficulties. 

I may tell them that I am not saying all this to put hindrance in the 
progress of the Hindu Code Bill. I am a staunch reformer and want 
that it should be passed, and with this very intention. I am submitting 
that it should be so modified as to be made applicable to the whole 
of the country. It can be made applicable only after such a change, 
otherwise not. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai (Uttar Pradesh) : I beg to move an amendment 
standing in my name. I was not present when I was called. 

Mr. Speaker : He can move it now. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai : I beg to move : 

Omit the proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 2. 

Mr. Speaker : Amendment moved : 

Omit the proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 2. 

*Shri J. R. Kapoor : Sir, with your permission, I may read out the 
amendment on which I wish to speak, to refresh the memory of Hon. 
Members, The amendment runs thus : 

For clause 2, 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : Which amendment is the hon. Member referring 
to ? 

Mr. Speaker : It is an amendment which he has given notice of 
today. It is not printed in the list. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : We have not got copies of that. 

Mr. Speaker : It was once read to the House; he is reading it again. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : The amendment runs thus : 

For clause 2, substitute : 

“2. Application of Code. — This Code or any part or parts thereof 
applies to all the citizens of India that is Bharat, who after attaining 
the age of majority, declare in writing that they shall be governed 
by this Code or any part or parts thereof, at the case may be, and 
get such declaration registered in accordance with rules prescribed 
for the purpose by the Central Government.” 


P.D., Vol. VIII, Part II, 5th February 1951, pp. 2392-98. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


816 


816 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Secondly, there is an alternative amendment. If this is not acceptable, 
I would commend the other alternative amendment to the acceptance of 
the House. The alternative amendment runs thus: 

In the amendment proposed by Shri Banarsi Prasad Jhunjhunwala, 
printed as No. 18 in Supplementary List No. 1 in the proposed proviso 
to clause 2, for the words beginning with the words “unless such person” 
to the end, substitute: 

“unless such person, after attaining the age of majority, declares in 
writing that he or she, as the case may be, shall be governed by this 
Code, and gets such declaration registered in accordance with rules 
prescribed for the purpose by the Central Government.” 

Mr. Jhunjhunwala’s amendment, as further amended by me, would 
run as follows: 

“2. Application of Code . — This Code or any part or parts thereof applies 
to all the citizens of India that is Bharat ” 

and then follows that this will be applicable only to those persons who 
would make a declaration in writing and so on and so forth ; I need not 
repeat that. 

Sir, I propose this amendment with a full sense of responsibility, and 
I hope I will not be misunderstood, as I hope the two previous speakers 
would not be misunderstood, for my amendment it is very much in 
line with the two amendments which have already been moved by my 
friend Mr. Sarwate and my friend Shri Indra Vidyavachaspati. Only 
mine is an improvement on theirs. I would like to submit first of all, 
that in proposing this amendment, I am actuated more particularly by 
the consideration that this Hindu Code should have an easy passage 
in this House. That is my first consideration. My second consideration 
is that it should be easily acceptable to the country as a whole, to 
the various sections of the community, to the various sections of the 
nation. And thirdly my consideration is that it should not be said of 
us that in this Parliament, in this country where we have a secular 
State, where we took very great pains to frame a constitution with 
the background of a secular State, we are now trying to legislate in 
a manner which smells of communalism, which clearly indicates that 
we are trying to legislate for one section of the community and not for 
the others, that we are trying to legislate for persons who profess one 
religion and are ignoring the interests of those who profess another 
religion, or vice-versa, that we are trying to do something to encroach 
upon the rights and religious customs of one section of the community 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


817 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 817 

and are afraid to encroach upon the rights and privileges of another 
section of the community professing another religion. Therefore, I 
submit that if my amendment is accepted, it will have very many 
advantages and absolutely no disadvantage. 

I was very happy to hear the point of order raised this morning 
by my friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad, not that I was particularly 
in agreement with the point of order raised by him, but because of 
the considerations and the reasons behind his point of order, and 
the considerations which weighed with him in raising that point of 
order. He raised the point of order, that the Constitution does not 
permit us to enact a discriminatory legislation. He referred to article 
15 of the Constitution. He referred also to article 25. I feel that 
the idea working in his mind was, if the provisions of the Hindu 
Code are beneficent and useful, why should they not be applicable 
to other sections of the Nation also? And what is in his mind, I 
am sure, is in keeping with the signs of the times. He would, I 
am sure, be glad, according to the point of order raised by him, to 
make an attempt to enact a legislation which would be applicable to 
all sections of the nation, Hindus, Muslims, Parsis and Christians. 
There is, of course, another article of the Constitution — article 44 
to which reference was made by my friend Mr. Sarwate, that the 
State shall attempt to have a uniform Civil Code. True, that article 
is not included in the chapter of Fundamental Rights, but it is under 
the chapter dealing with the Directive Principles. The Constitution 
directs us specifically that we should make an attempt to have a 
uniform Civil Code for the whole country. Well, this is the first 
occasion when we are attempting to have a Civil Code and in this 
very first attempt, will it be proper for us, will it be desirable for 
us to ignore this very important article of the Constitution ? Let us 
not make a beginning by doing something contrary to the specific 
directive that has been given to us by the Constitution. When we 
were sitting as the Constituent Assembly — we all were in it, most 
of us, and many other eminent persons who are not here were also 
there — many Muslim Members were also there, and there were Parsis 
also, and there were also Christians, and persons professing every 
faith were there. All of them, as far as I remember, unanimously 
agreed to these clauses in the Constitution, I mean articles 15, 
25 and 44. When all those persons professing every faith, were 
seriously and coolly and calmly considering what sort of legislation 
we should have in this country, they all unanimously decided that 
we should have a uniform legislation, so as to be in conformity with 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


818 


818 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

articles 15 and 25 of the Constitution, and also article 44. What 
has happened since then and now to compel us, to persuade us not 
to act according to those articles of our Constitution ? Nothing has 
really happened since then, which should persuade us to go contrary 
to those provisions. On the other hand, we find that even persons 
professing religions other than Hinduism, are also anxious that 
we should have a uniform Civil Code. Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad is a 
representative of the Muslims. He himself says that it is not open to 
have a legislation which will govern only one section of the nation, 
but that one legislation, must govern all the sections of the nation, 
all persons professing various religions. That being so, I submit 
there is no reason why we should hesitate to legislate for persons 
professing different religions. From the amendments that have been 
tabled and have already been moved. I find that the Sikhs would 
like to go away from the operation of this Code. That is the effect 
of one of the amendments moved by my hon. friend Sardar Hukam 
Singh. Then I find that there are other Hon. Members who are 
anxious that this clause 2 should be so amended that it should not 
be applicable necessarily to all the States and all the community. 
My Hon. Friend Pandit Thakurdas Bhargava, as we all know, is a 
very great social reformer, and he is always anxious to introduce 
legislations in this House directed towards social uplift. According to 
his amendment what he wants is that it should be left open to the 
various States to adopt the legislation or not. He also desires that 
it should be open to the various communities either to be governed 
by the Code or not. 

Shri Tyagi : Surely it will not be territorially uniform in that case. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Exactly. In order to make it applicable to all 
the territories and communities my amendment should be accepted. 
It does not restrict the operation of this Code to one territory or 
another, nor to one community or another. On the other hand it 
extends the scope of this legislation and seeks to embrace within 
its ambit Hindus, Muslims, Christians, Parsis or persons professing 
any other faith. 

During the general discussion of this Bill some good points were 
made by my hon. Friends Dr. Tek Chand and Pandit Thakur Das 
Bhargava. They said that this Bill would operate in a great measure 
as a hardship on various sections of the Hindu community, among 
whom marriage and divorce laws are easy. In some parts of the Punjab 
and elsewhere, it was pointed, marriages can be easily performed. 
Why should they be deprived of this easy manner of their marriages ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


819 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 819 

Dr. Deshmukh (Madhya Pradesh) : Easy marriage, easy divorce ! 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : In the matter of divorce they have easy laws 
in various parts of the country, among various sections of the people. 
Why should those laws be made more difficult ? On the one hand the 
contention of some was that marriage and divorce laws were made 
more and more strict by the Code and on the other, the contention of 
others was why should these marriage and divorce laws be enforced 
on persons who did not believe in them. My submission therefore is 
that this Code in whatever form it is passed, should not be forced on 
any particular section of the Hindu community, or the Sikhs or Jains. 
It should be left open to them to be governed by it or not. Secondly, 
some of the provisions of this Code — particularly those relating to 
monogamy and divorce, with which I am in entire agreement and 
would like them to be made a little more liberal — are so good that 
I see no reason why the Muslims should not be entitled to have the 
advantage thereof. 

My hon. Friends Shri Sarwate and Shri Indra have moved their 
amendments. Particularly the amendment of Shri Indra wants that the 
whole Code should be compulsorily made applicable to the Muslims. I 
do not want that it should be so enforced on Muslims just as I do not 
want that it should be obligatory on every Hindu to be governed by 
this Code. I want that it should be open to a Hindu, Muslim, Parsi or 
for the matter of that any person professing any other religion hereto 
or hereafter, in fact it should be open to every citizen of India either 
to be governed by the Code or not. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Great liberal ! 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Not only that, I want that it should be open 
to anybody to pick and choose various parts of the Code. I am making 
this statement with all seriousness, because of this reason. There 
are various clauses in this Bill which should be readily acceptable to 
some but not to others, similarly there are other clauses which may 
be acceptable to others but not to all. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Does my hon. Friend contend that 
the choice of the person should be per clause ? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Not per clause but various important parts of 
the Code. When I made that suggestion I knew that it may require 
the legal intelligence of Dr. Ambedkar as also Pandit Bhargava and 
other legal luminaries to amend the various sections of the Code so 
as to make them fall in line with my amendment. I am sure that this 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


820 


820 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

task is not beyond the capacity of Dr. Ambedkar or Pandit Bhargava 
or other legal luminaries. Speaking for myself I am particularly in 
favour of the clause relating to monogamy and divorce. But there 
are other clauses which I would not like to adopt. I would therefore 
like to have the liberty of making a declaration to the fact that so 
far as I am concerned I would like to be governed by the clauses 
relating to monogamy and divorce and not others. I would beg of 
this house very seriously to consider the suggestion. Firstly, that 
this enactment should be applicable to the entire nation, secondly, 
it should be open to anyone to say by declaration that he wants 
to be governed by this Code and thirdly, it should be open to him 
to say also that he wants to be governed by this or that chapter. 

Dr. Deshmukh: If the husband and wife differ on the issue of 
say divorce, who will decide ? 

The Minister of Works, Production and Supply (Shri Gadgil) : 

The child will decide. 

Mr. Speaker : Let the hon. Member proceed. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : If the husband and wife differ on the divorce 
issue I am prepared to give the choice to the wife, if thereby I can 
secure the support of the lady Members here. If my suggestion 
is accepted, of course the various provisions of the Bill will have 
to be recast. It is a matter of principle. Once the principle is 
accepted — namely that we should have one uniform law for the 
whole country, secondly that we should give the liberty to every 
citizen to say whether he wants to be governed by the Code or not 
and thirdly, the liberty to pick and choose various aspects of the 
Code — proper amendments could of course be drafted. I know how 
difficult it is but difficult as it is certainly it is much easier than 
the task of getting this Bill passed by this House and, certainly it 
is easier than to get the support of the entire nation for this Bill 
as it is, compulsorily enforceable among the Hindus, Sikhs, Jains 
and Buddhists. 

Therefore, I submit that my suggestion should be very seriously 
considered. I hope and trust that if we consider it coolly, calmly, 
dispassionately and without any prejudice either for or against it, 
certainly we shall be able to come to an agreed solution and perhaps 
within five or seven days we may be able to pass this controversial 
measure. It will satisfy everybody. It will satisfy those who want to 
have a uniform Code. It will satisfy the orthodox Hindus because it 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


821 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 821 

will not be necessary to enforce the Code on them; it will be open to 
them to be governed by it or not. It will satisfy those reformers also 
who want to have legislation on these lines because it will enable 
them to declare that they want to be governed by this legislation. 
It will therefore satisfy everybody and offend nobody. With these 
submissions I commend my amendment for the acceptance of the 
House. 

My alternative amendment is also on the same lines but it restricts 
the operation of the Code to Hindus only. According to my first 
amendment, I want that the whole Code, in whatever form it may 
be passed, should be applicable to the entire nation, subject to the 
condition that it will be applicable only to those who declare that 
they want to be governed by it. If, however, that suggestion is not 
acceptable for any reason then I submit in my second amendment 
that the Code should be applicable to the Hindus, Sikhs and Jains 
as has been provided but that there also it should be applicable 
only to such Hindus, Jains, Sikhs and Buddhists who by declaration 
state they want to be governed by it. 

*Dr. Deshmukh : I have two points to make so far as these 
amendments are concerned. There are various amendments that 
have been moved but I should first wish to speak on the amendment 
of Mr. Sarwate and then on the amendment moved by the Hon. 
Dr. Ambedkar. I feel inclined to support the amendment of 
Mr. Sarwate on constitutional basis, and I feel that he has certainly 
brought forward an amendment which advances the cause of the 
Constitution, in case it is accepted that it requires advancement. I 
personally think it does since there is a section of Members of this 
House who do not regard very seriously what we have embodied 
in the Constitution. I would beg of you to give me a few minutes 
to refer to article 44 which reads: 

“The State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a uniform 

civil Code throughout the territory of India”. 

Now, this is an article from the Directive Principles of State Policy. 
Although it is not contemplated that any decision of government could 
be set aside by the Supreme Court or could be regarded as illegal 
and against law on this score, I don’t know whether it would be 
competent for the Supreme Court to give a ruling. But if we attach 

*P.D., Vol. VIII, Part II, 5th February 1951, pp. 2392-2404. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


822 


822 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

any value or wish to give any serious consideration to the Directive 
Principles of State Policy in the Constitution, I am unable to see how by 
passing this Code we would be endeavouring to secure for the citizens 
a uniform Civil Code throughout the territory of India. What we would 
be doing by this Code would be entirely and directly contrary to what 
is laid down in Article 14. Because this is not only not endeavouring 
to secure for the citizens a uniform Civil Code but trying to enact 
a different Code for a section of the people. So, before we go ahead, 
before we waste any more time, we should consider this point. And I 
am sure we are doing nothing else but wasting time because for the 
next three days I am certain it would not be easy to go much further 
than Clause 2 and we don’t know how long after that we would be 
touching the Hindu Code. A suggestion has already been made that it 
would have been far better, if we really wanted to pass this Code, that 
one whole session should have been devoted to it. To allot three days 
during which it would not be possible to advance very far I consider, 
a pure waste of time, energy and money of this House. It can serve 
only one purpose and that of merely satisfying the whims and fancies 
or dogged determination or inclination of certain people. It would be 
quite easy when we have got a couple of thousand people obstructing 
our way or shouting slogans to desist Members of this House from 
passing this Code, to find one or two persons who would like to go 
to the law courts to get a ruling that what we are trying to do is not 
only not in keeping with the constitutional provisions but is directly 
opposed to what has been laid down. 

Shrimati Durgabai : Others also will go to courts. 

Dr. Deshmukh : Both sides will be there. You will get a notice at 
the cost of those people who go there first. 

Shrimati Durgabai : Others will be there on the basis of provisions 
regarding discrimination. 

Dr. Deshmukh : Yes, there is discrimination everywhere and that 
is exactly the objection that is raised. If we enact this Code as it is, 
there will be discrimination in favour of certain people and against 
certain others who are also handicapped similarly, if not worse. That 
is a point which goes in our favour. 

My second point on these amendments is that I am opposed to 
the amendment moved by Dr. Ambedkar. By his amendment No. 15 
in the printed list, he wants the substitution of the words “persons 
who are Hindus by religion” for the words “Hindus, that is to say, 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


823 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 823 

to all persons professing the Hindu religion”. It is very difficult 
to find out which version really holds the ground at the present 
moment when there have been so many revisions and such a huge 
lot of amendments have been moved. It is not easy to know where 
exactly we stand. I don’t see what is wrong with the original 
provision contained in the Code as it emerged from the Select 
Committee. The wording there is : 

“ 2 (a) This Code applies to all Hindus, that is to say, to all persons 

professing the Hindu religion in any of its forms or developments.” 

In his amendment Dr. Ambedkar proposes the substitution of 
these words by “persons who are Hindus by religion”. I don’t see 
any difference between the two wordings. By the words “all Hindus” 
you refer to all people who are “Hindus by religion”. The original 
wording further explains the words “all Hindus” by saying it means 
“all persons professing the Hindu religion”. Thereby the Code will 
apply to any person who claims to be a Hindu. These words are 
now sought to be substituted. No reasons have so far been given 
as to why they are going to be substituted by new words. If they 
are actually omitted, and if Dr. Ambedkar can persuade the House 
to omit those words, I think a very real difficulty may arise. If 
you eliminate “professing” how are you going to define who is 
a Hindu and who is not a Hindu. The words proposed are “all 
persons who are Hindus by religion”. But how do we know who 
is a Hindu by religion and who is not ? Is it proposed that every 
person would be required to make a declaration ? I don’t know 
what procedure is suggested and how it would be ascertained if a 
particular person is a Hindu or not. I would say that the words 
as they stood in the original Code as it emerged out of the Select 
Committee have stood the test of time. So far as my recollection 
goes, these words are there in Mulla’s Hindu Code and these 
words have been used from very old times. They have a sanction 
of long usage. 

In view of that there is, in my opinion, no need for this 
amendment and I would suggest that it should not be accepted. 
I support the amendment moved by my hon. friend Shri Sarwate 
on the ground that if we accept it, we would be acting in the 
spirit of the Constitution. Otherwise all our efforts are liable to be 
fruitless in view of the constitutional difficulty I have pointed out. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


824 


824 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Syamnandan Sabaya (Bihar): May I make a submission in 
this connection ? There are several amendments moved formally by the 
authors, but the movers have not made any speech explaining their 
viewpoint. One of such amendment is from the Hon. the Law Minister 
himself. Such of us who have not moved any amendment to this clause 
and have an open mind would like to hear the Government point of 
view as also the point of view of the movers of the other amendments 
in order to enable us either to take part in the deliberations or to 
decide how to act in the circumstances. May I therefore suggest that 
movers of the amendments should first make their speeches and then 
the clause should be thrown open for general discussion. This would 
help the discussion and the decision. In any case, we would like to hear 
the Hon. the Law Minister’s view point on his amendment, so that we 
may either support him or oppose him. 

Mr. Speaker : I was thinking of calling upon the movers of the 
amendments one by one, but I found that instead of the movers who 
did not appear anxious to catch my eye others caught my eyes. That 
is why I called upon others. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The movers have sat back. In fact, I am myself 
waiting to hear them. 

Mr. Speaker : The Hon. the Law Minister is at liberty to choose 
his own time but I did call upon him now because I thought that if 
he participated a little later it would be possible for him to clear the 
ground. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I can speak at any time. 

Mr. Speaker : He will be entitled to two speeches; that is to say, 
even if he participates in the debate now, he will be entitled to reply. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahay : He may reply to the general debate 
on the clause, but as regards his own amendment he must satisfy the 
House that there is some reason for moving that amendment on behalf 
of Government. 

Mr. Speaker : I think his position stands a little differently. He has 
to take into consideration what others say and then he will be able 
to explain his viewpoint better. That is why I was thinking of calling 
upon him at a later stage, though not at the end. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : I do not know how the impression has 
got into your mind that the movers of the amendment do not want to 
speak on their amendments. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


825 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 825 

Mr. Speaker : I never said ‘they never wanted to speak’. I said 
they did not try to catch my eye. In between, Dr. Deshmukh got up 
and I called on him to speak. 

Several Hon. Members : rose — 

Mr. Speaker : I am not sure whether I should call Pandit Bhargava 
at this stage — for personal reasons. Mr. Jhunjunwala. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : Sir, I have given notice of two alternative 
amendments. One of my amendments reads thus: 

“This Code applies to all citizens of India, that is Bharat, irrespective 
of their caste, creed, and irrespective of their belonging to or professing 
any religion”. 

Alternatively, I have moved another amendment which reads thus : 

“Provided, however, that notwithstanding anything contained in the 
above clauses, this Code shall not apply to any person unless such person 
got his name registered with such authority and in such manner as may 
be hereafter prescribed by Parliament, within one year after this Code 
comes into force, and in case of a minor within one year after such a 
minor attains majority.” 

I want to assure the House that these amendments of mine are not 
dilatory ; nor am I opposed to all the provisions of this Code. The main 
object in moving my first amendment is that, as has been pointed 
out by my hon. Friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad, we have been passing 
many laws which are being declared ultra vires either by the High 
Courts or by the Supreme Court. It is therefore very necessary that 
before we take any such Bill, Act or legislation into consideration we 
should make sure that we are acting according to the Constitution. 
If we pass any law and ultimately that law is declared ultra vires, 
it will be a mere waste of the time of this House and also waste of 
so much money. It will serve no useful purpose. Under article 15 of 
the Constitution it is laid down that the State shall not discriminate 
against any citizen only on ground of religion, race, caste, sex, place of 
birth or any of them. The amendment that I have moved makes this 
Code applicable to all citizens of India, that is, Bharat, whereas the 
clause as it stands is restricted only to a particular class of persons. 
If the law that we are passing is for the good it is good for all people. 
It is not right that we should discriminate one particular community 
against another. We should not discriminate one set of persons who 
are professing one religion from another set of persons who are 
professing another religion if our law is for their good. If it is not 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


826 


826 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

for their good, then it is not right that we should thrust any law or 
enactment upon a particular community or caste which is professing 
a particular religion. 

One of the points which I wanted to make out was this : the 
House should see whether this Bill is one which Parliament can 
make, especially as it is restricted to a particular kind of persons 
professing a particular kind of religion. We can have such a law 
under Article 25 of the Constitution. Now let us see what are the 
provisions in article 25 which entitle us to take up such legislation. 
Article 25(1) reads : 

“Subject to public order, morality and health and to the other provisions 
of this Part, all persons are equally entitled to freedom of conscience 
and the right freely to profess, practise and propagate religion.” 

Clause 2 of the Bill relating to the Application of the Code reads : 

“(1) This Code applies — 

(a) to all Hindus, that is to say, to all persons professing the Hindu 
religion in any of its forms or developments, including Virashaivas 
or Lingayats and members of the Brahmo, the Prarthana, or the 
Arya Samaj; 

(b) to any person who is a Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion ; 

(c) (i) to any child, legitimate or illegitimate, both of whose parents 
are Hindus within the meaning of this section; 

(ii) to any child, legitimate or illegitimate one of whose parents 
is a Hindu within the meaning of this section; provided that such 
child is brought up as a member of the community, group or family 
to which such parent belongs or belonged; and 

(d) to a convert to the Hindu religion. 

(2) This Code also applies to any person, who is not a Muslim, 
Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion : 

Provided that if it is proved that such person would not have been 
governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or usage as part of that 
law in respect of any of the matters dealt with herein if this Code 
has not been passed, then, this Code shall not apply to that person in 
respect of those matters; 

(3) The expression “Hindu” in any portion of this Code shall be 
construed as if it included a person who, though not a Hindu by religion 
is, nevertheless, governed by the provisions of this Code ; 

(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Special Marriage 
Act, 1872 (III of 1872), this Code shall apply to all Hindus whose 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


827 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 827 

marriages have been solemnized under the provisions of that Act prior 

to the commencement of this Code.” 

I have not been able to understand why this Code is being enacted 
only for the Hindus, if the right has been given — as has been done 
under article 25 — that “ subject to public order, morality and health 
and to the other provisions of this Part, all persons are equally entitled 
to freedom of conscience and the right freely to profess, practise and 
propagate religion.” If this right has been given to the Hindus and 
persons professing other religions, I do not see any reason why it is 
sought to be taken away from Hindus by enactment of such laws, such 
as the one now before us. I would ask the Law Minister whether he 
is not encroaching on the rights of Hindus of their religious liberty 
sanctioned by the Constitution. 

Clause (2) of article 25, however says that: 

“ Nothing in this article shall effect the operation of any existing 

law or prevent the State from making any law — 

(a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or 
other secular activity which may be associated with religious practice; 

(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open 
of Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes 
and sections of Hindus.” 

But if this piece of legislation which is now under discussion is 
being enacted as a measure of social reform and for the welfare of the 
people, in that case I cannot understand why it should be confined to 
persons professing particular religions and not extended to all. 

Shri Raj Bahadur : May I raise a point of order, Sir. 

Three or four hon. Members of this House have raised the point that 
the scope or application of this piece of legislation should be extended 
to all the citizens of India. In the course of the first reading of the 
Bill the house has already committed itself to the principle that the 
Bill shall apply only to the Hindus. Having accepted this principle, 
is it now open to Members to take up this point anew and afresh ? 

Mr. Speaker : The point of order practically comes to this — I am 
stating it in my own way. Briefly stated it would be as to whether 
some of the amendments which seek to extend the application of 
this Code to communities other than those included in the Bill is 
not tantamount to an extension of the scope of the Bill — is that the 
point of order ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


828 


828 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Raj Bahadur : The House had agreed that this Code shall 
apply to one section of the Indian people alogb ne. Can we now take 
a new decision that it shall apply to all ? 

Mr. Speaker : It comes to the same thing. The objection is that the 
scope of the Bill is being extended now — that is the point of objection. 
Personally, I myself was feeling doubtful about the admissibility of 
certain amendments which are now proposed and which apparently 
seek to extend the scope of the Bill but I have not come to any 
conclusion. I should first hear Members and then decide at the end 
as to whether I should put the amendments to vote or not. 

Dr. P. S. Deshmukh : It is quite open to the House to extend or 
limit the scope of any legislation. So long as any particular clause is not 
passed by the House, it is completely at liberty to do that. Supposing 
the original Bill says that the Code will apply to the whole of India 
and the House proposes an amendment by which it excludes certain 
States or vice versa ? I feel certain the House is quite competent to 
do so. 

Mr. Speaker : The extension of the Act to the whole of India and 
then limiting it to a part of India would not be an extension of the 
principle of the Act. The principle of the Act is something of substantive 
law, which extends not territorially but in other respects. It is perfectly 
competent, prima facie, to say that it shall not apply to Sikhs, Jains 
or Buddhists; but the point is whether it is competent now to say that 
it shall apply to Christians, Muslims, Parsis and Jews. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : There are two submissions I wish 
to make. 

Before you give a ruling I would request you to give us a little chance. 

Mr. Speaker : I shall give members every chance. 

Khwaja Inait Ullah (Bihar) : Are these amendments which are being 

. moved directed to bring in Muslims also within the scope 

4. p.m. 

of the Hindu Code and directed against our Fundamental 
Rights under article 25 of the Constitution ? 

Mr. Speaker : That does not arise. It is a part of the wider question 
again as to whether the Code itself goes against the spirit of the 
Constitution. 

Khwaja Inait Ullah : It is clear 

Mr. Speaker : It may be clear to the hon. Member, but it is not 
so clear to me. Therefore, let us hear what the hon. Members have 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


829 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 829 

to say and then coolly consider. There is no use going on presuppositions. 
After all it is a matter which affects vitally large sections of people. 
The question is whether it offends against the provisions of the 
Constitution. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Before you are pleased to give a ruling on this 
question as to whether these amendments are or not in order, may 
I request you to give us an opportunity to speak on that particular 
point, because so far none of us have expressed ourselves about the 
admissibility of these amendments ? 

Mr. Speaker : I think I shall give them an opportunity. But first 
of all I want to hear what they really mean and whether they are 
trying to extend the scope of the Bill. I shall give them a hearing. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : I was pointing out to the House that if a 
particular kind of legislation is one of reform or is in the interests 
of public good, then this Parliament will not be partial in enacting 
such a kind of legislation. 

[Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava in the Chair.} 

When a particular kind of legislation is being enacted for the 
welfare of the people why should it be restricted wholly to a certain 
class of persons and why should it not be extended to all ? If it is 
good, it is good; if it is bad, it is bad. And if it is bad why should we 
apply it to the Hindus ? Why should we thrust it upon the Hindus ? 
Why should they not be left free to practise their own religion and 
act according to their own ancient ideas ? It is said that this Bill 
is being enacted because the present system of marriage and other 
things are not in the interest of society, that they are spoiling society 
and that this particular kind of legislation is good for the society. If 
a particular kind of legislation may be regarding marriage, may be 
regarding inheritance, may be regarding anything, I do not want to 
go into those details which I shall do when the particular clauses 
come — but if, as I have said, particular things are good for certain 
persons. I would like to have the reasons from my hon. friend 
Dr. Ambedkar who is described as Manu of modern age as to why 
the particular piece of legislation is bad for Muslims, because he is 
excluding them, he is purposely excluding them by saying that this 
Code shall not apply to Muslims. I would like to know why it should 
not apply to everybody and why it should apply only to Hindus. If it 
is good it should apply to you, me and everybody. And secondly, as 
I said, if it is a bad law, why should it be thrust upon a particular 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 830 

830 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

class of persons ? Lastly, when the question comes up whether these 
amendments are admissible or not, just as my friend Mr. Jaspat 
Roy Kapoor has said, I would request that we should be given an 
opportunity to explain our position. 

*Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, as regards the amendment 
moved by the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar, I raised at that time a point 
of order. I should first of all try to explain my point of order, 
because the other amendments depend upon that point of order. 
You will be pleased to notice that this amendment is drafted in a 
language which is highly insulting to the House. It says “In clause 
2, in sub-clause (1), in item (a), for “Hindus, that is to say, to all 
persons professing the Hindu religion” substitute ‘persons who are 
Hindus’ and so on and so forth. In the next item the wording is 
“substitute” something. In part (2) it is again “omit” something. 
This is expressed in the imperative form. As Dr. Pattabhi on 
one occasion said, Dr. Ambedkar speaks in a professorial and 
dictatorial tone. This amendment is couched in that language. Not 
merely this, but all the amendments. I have examined one and all 
of them. They are in the form of correction slips, or orders by a 
superior officer of Government to his subordinates. So this is really 
a direction to the House to do this and that, imperatively. The 
usual form is that “for such and such thing the following shall be 
substituted” or that “the following shall be omitted”. That is the 
form. I submit that the drafting has been done so carelessly and so 
much in the official style that they cannot be accepted as setting 
a new standard of courtesy to the House. All the amendments are 
couched in that language. I seriously ask the House to consider 
whether this method of wording the amendments will be acceptable 
at all. I, therefore, like in some of the amendments to cure this 
imperious form. I have suggested the usual form. And it is not 
merely the usual form in this House but in the previous House 
and in all other legislative bodies. The question is whether we 
should permit the setting up of a new standard entirely its own. 
You will be pleased to examine all the amendments and they are 
all couched like this. The point of order which I submit is whether 
it is in good form. If it is not, then the next amendment which I 
have submitted to cure this should be accepted in preference to 
this. Nothing will be lost but everything will be gained in decorum 
and official form. Sir, I ask you to give a ruling on this point. 


P.D., Vol. VIII, Part II, 5th February 1951. pp. 2404-23. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


831 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 831 

Mr. Chairman : I am not impressed by the speech of the hon. 
Member in regard to the facts to conclude that any point of order 
regarding my ruling has been made out. He was making certain 
observations to which the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar will in time reply. 
Threrefore there is no point for ruling. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : The two other amendments which 
I suggested depended upon the rejection of the form or otherwise 
of the amendments. That is why I want a ruling from you. If it is 
in good form, of course, we shall also indulge in such forms and 
the House can also be allowed to degenerate to that sort of form. 

Then with regard to clause 2, one important point has been raised 
by the several amendments and supported by several hon. Members. 
It is that the Code should be made applicable to all persons in 
India. I was asked to sponsor this idea and when I raised the point 
of order, I did nothing of the sort at all, but my point is that the 
Bill is bad for the Hindus and when it is bad, this bad law should 
not be made applicable to all. A bad law can not be made good by 
making it applicable to all. If it is bad for the Hindus, it should 
be rejected. The point I was driving at was 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : The fate should be shared equally by all 
the Hindus and non-Hindus alike. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : That is a form of logic which 
amounts to a joke and is certainly acceptable but seriously in a 
legislature this cannot be accepted. If a law is bad, it should not 
be extended to put pressure on those on whom it is going to be 
applied. Constitutionally this law will bring degradation. This point 
has been seriously raised outside the House; it has been freely 
talked about and it is more than certain that this law could not be 
taken before a court of law. We have passed several principles in 
the Constitution. We have worded the clauses in the Constitution 
in a general way with the result that they have landed us already 
into difficulties. The Constitution stands in the way of this Bill 
being passed. 

Shri Tyagi : We will change the Constitution. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : My learned friend says if the 
Constitution is badly drafted and has landed us into difficulties, why 
not change the Constitution. I ask why should it be that you are at 
liberty to pass a law for the Hindus ? Why should there be a policy 
of distinction followed between Hindus and Muslims in their own 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


832 


832 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

domestic sphere ? I think it is not logic. It is not good. The Hindus 
should remain Hindus at home and they should be Hindus in their 
religious practices. Similarly the Christians and Muslims should 
have their freedom of thought, worship and religion which has 
been granted in another part of the Constitution. I ask the House 
to consider whether in view of the number of defects noticed in the 
Constitution, it requires revision. I think it is easier within two 
years of the passing of the Constitution to amend it than it would 
be after two years. So it is time for us to amend the Constitution to 
make it possible to pass a good law affecting the Hindus. So far as 
religious and semi-religious matters are concerned the law could not 
interfere and at least it should not be dictated from the top. This 
is a kind of dictatorship which does persist in democratic society. 

Shri Tyagi : Marriage and divorce do not come under religion. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I believe the Hindu marriage is one 
of the Samskaras ; it is the tenth Samskara; it is part of their 
religion and it is idle to argue that it is not part of their religion. 
I say you may abolish religion and the law gives you freedom and 
this House is a sovereign House within the Constitution. You can 
abolish religion, if you like but will you go so far as that ? So far as 
this is concerned. I do not want to pursue it further but then look at 
the condition in which we exist today. We have no food. We had to 
spend Rs. 200 crores for importing food from foreign countries and 
to make us live for this year. (Interruption). We have no clothes. 
There are no shelters for many of our countrymen; we cannot give 
primary education at all but what we give is a free gift to the Hindus 
in the shape of the Hindu Code. If you want to make them happy, 
you must give them food, give them education. 

The Deputy Minister of Communications (Shri Khurshed 
Lai) : This might have been a very good argument on the motion 
for taking the Bill into consideration. We are now considering a 
specific clause. 

Mr. Chairman : I was waiting to hear the last words of his 
concluding remarks to know the inference he proposed to draw from 
his preceding observations. 

Shri Tyagi : I want to know how is it that a Muslim is quoting 
our scriptures. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : We should not think of this Code but 
we should think of more and more constructive things which would 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


833 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 833 

make the people happy, give them elementary education etc. In these 
dangerous times there is the other danger of the world situation 
deteriorating. War is approaching India step by step. 

Mr. Chairman : I am very sorry. I do not want to interfere but I 
think the hon. Member is at sea on his arguments. He ought to proceed 
with his amendments. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I was only submitting that this is not the 
proper time to go on with this Bill. 

Shri Khurshed Lai : We are not discussing the consideration motion. 

Mr. Chairman : I will ask the hon. Member to speak on his 
amendments. If he wants to say that so far as the particular amendments 
of Dr. Ambedkar are concerned, they are not right, I would certainely 
allow that but if he goes on to say that this Bill should not be proceeded 
with, I think it is beyond the province of any hon. Member at this stage 
to say so. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I was encourged to make this suggestion 
only for one reason that it is understood that Government has decided 
to proceed with this Bill only for two or three days 

Mr. Chairman : I would ask the hon. Member to proceed with his 
amendments. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : ( Interruption ) I rather think that many 
hon. Members have nothing to think of except interrupting . Sir, there 
are a number of amendments standing to my credit and I shall deal 
with them one by one. The first two amendments Nos. 16 and 17, were 
suggested to improve the form in which Dr. Ambedkar’s motion has been 
tabled. They do not deal with any other principle except improving the 
form. Then, I come to amendment No. 19. 

In part (c)(i) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, after “Illegitimate”, insert: 

“who, if he has attained the age of eighteen years, is himself a Hindu 

and” 

I am sorry that a very large number of widely divergent subjects 
have had to be moved separately, and have to be argued upon in a lot. 
That is why some hon. Members seem to lose thread of the argument. 
Sub-clause (1) which I seek to amend, reads thus: 

“This Code applies — 

(c)(i) to any child legitimate or illegitimate, both of whose parents 

are Hindus within the meaning of this section.” 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


834 


834 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Satish Chandra (Uttar Pradesh): This has been read several 
times. 

Mr. Chairman: Let the hon. Member proceed. To keep up the thread 
of the argument, he must be allowed to read. 

Shri Tyagi: This thing about illegitimate child was not read. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: The child of a Hindu, particularly, if he be 
illegitimate, may not himself remain a Hindu. This sub-clause proceeds 
on the supposition that a child of a Hindu remains a Hindu. But, it 
is quite possible for him to change his religion. He may discard all 
religions ; he may be an atheist. He may become a Jew, a Christian or 
a Muslim, and then again be re-converted to Hinduism. The supposition 
that an illegitimate child of a Hindu is a Hindu presupposes that he 
does not change. As a matter of fact, he can change. If he changes his 
religion, certainly, he cannot be a Hindu, and cannot inherit his father’s 
property and so forth. An illegitimate child of a Hindu father will inherit 
his fathers properties ; but if he changes his religion, he ceases to be a 
Hindu and therefore, he ceases to be the heir. 

Shri Tyagi: A father can never have an illegitimate child; a mother 
only can have. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : That is a legal question. If a father cannot 
have an illegitimate child, this clause should have been deleted. 

Shri Tyagi: The child is ( Interruption ). 

Mr. Chairman : Order, order; let him proceed. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : My amendment says, “if he has attained 

the age of eighteen years, is himself a Hindu ” That is to say, 

after attaining the age of eighteen years, when he attains the age 
of discretion and is permitted by law to act in a legal manner, if he 
remains a Hindu, then, of course, he is a Hindu. He is a child of his 
father entitled to inherit and enjoy all the benefits of the Hindu Law. 
This amendment tries to remove a lacuna which exists in the drafting. 
An illegitimate child, if he attains the age of eighteen years and if he 
does not change his religion, then, of course, he could come in. That is 
what I have sought to clarify here. 

Let us come to another amendment; it is of a drafting nature. It 
reads as follows: 

In part (c)(i) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, for “whose parents are 
Hindus” substitute “whose parents are or have been Hindus”. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


835 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 835 

It may be that the parents of a child are Hindus; but they 
may change their religion. So, I want that in order to have this 
relationship 

Shri K. C. Sharma (Uttar Pradesh): May I draw the attention 
of the chairman to the convention of the House that all drafting 
amendments be left to the draftmen and the time of the House 
be not wasted ? 

Mr. Chairman : There is no such absolute convention; it all 
depends on the particular amendment. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : This only shows that the hon. 
Member is not listening to the arguments, but is only trying to 
find and create objections. Although this is more of drafting nature, 
I think it involves a substantial thing. The question is this. You 
say that a child, legitimate or illegitimate of a Hindu, is a Hindu. 
Supposing the father changes his religion in that case, he is not a 
Hindu at the relevant time when the question arises. I therefore 
want to make it clear that he is a Hindu or has been a Hindu. 
It may be that a father was not a Hindu, but has accepted the 
Hindu religion at the relevant time. If you say, a man who is a 
Hindu, it means, who is a Hindu for the time being; he might not 
have been a Hindu before. That is why I am saying : “a person 
who is or has been a Hindu”; who has been a Hindu all along. 
The child of such a parent would be a Hindu. Suppose there is 
a Muslim who adopts the Hindu religion today. The question of 
the status of his child comes into question. Could his child, who 
was born at a time when the parents were Muslims, be a Hindu 
today because today the father is a Hindu ? That is why I have 
tried to change the clause. Though it is of a drafting nature, it has 
substantial effects. I submit that these small points require careful 
consideration. The question, in effect, is, if a man is converted to 
Hinduism today, whether his child, who may be a Christian, or 
a Muslim or a Jew according to the religion of his father before 
his conversion, would be a Hindu. This is a serious constitutional 
question, and I hope the House will seriously consider that. But, 
the difficulty would be for the Hon. Law Minister to carefully 
listen to these points and to reply to them, and for the House to 
follow all these arguments and replies. As a matter of fact, Dr. 
Ambedkar will say, “I oppose all the amendments” and the House 
will say, “We respectfully agree”. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


836 


836 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Several Hon. Members: Never, never. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : My next amendment, No. 21, I would 
repeat my argument, enforces a condition that a man, whose religion 
is in question, is a Hindu if he is a Hindu after attaining the age 
of eighteen years; because at the age of eighteen, he is entitled to 
act in a legal manner, and if he has attained the age of eighteen 
years, he may change his religion. Therefore, the option of a boy, 
on attaining the age of eighteen years, to change his religion, is 
provided for. That contingency has not been thought of by the 
draftsmen. Therefore, I am submitting this amendment for the 
consideration of the House. 

I now come to my next amendment No. 23. It runs thus: 

For part (d) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, substitute: 

“(d) to a convert to the Hindu religion, subject to his rights and 
liabilities before his conversion.” 

You say that a convert to a Hindu religion would be a Hindu. 
It is plain commonsense that a man has freedom of conscience 
and religion and he would be fully entitled to convert himself to 
Hinduism. But, what happens to his rights and liabilities before 
he is converted ? I will explain the position. A Christian, a married 
man, is converted today to the Hindu religion. What happens to 
his wife ? Would the wife be automatically divorced because she is 
not a Hindu ? A marriage between a Hindu and a Christian would 
be illegal. I agree that a convert to the Hindu religion should be 
treated as a Hindu. But, what about his rights and liabilites before 
conversion ? There are numerous rights and liabilities. I do not 
wish to detain the House by detailing the various considerations 
which may arise on account of this. I simply put it generally that 
a convert should be a Hindu, subject to all the rights and liabilities 
he had before the conversion. Suppose there was a non-Hindu 
possessing rich property, and suppose he is converted to Hinduism. 
Should you ask him to lose all his property ? If he is to inherit 
from some one, before conversion, should he lose this inheritance 
after his conversion. There are laws relevant to this which occur 
to me, but I only submit that we should preserve all the rights 
and liabilities acquired by the man who is converted, before his 
conversion. The status quo of the rights previously acquired should 
not be disturbed. All those rights should not be lost simply by the 
conversion. Rights once acquired should not be allowed to be lost. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


837 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 837 

Liabilities incurred should not be allowed to vanish, all because of a 
later conversion. The conversion should not affect past transactions, 
past rights and past liabilities. 

Then, my next amendment is that sub-clause (2) of clause 2 should 
be omitted. This sub-clause is to this effect : 

“This Code also applies to any other person, who is not a Muslim, 

Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion.” 

This sub-clause, I submit, is based on erroneous considerations, 
and on erroneous analogies. In part (a) we have said that this Code 
applies : 

“to all Hindus, that is to say, to all persons professing the Hindu 

religion in any of its forms or developments, ...” 

And we also say that it applies: 

“ to any person who is a Buddhist, Jaina or Sikh by religion.” 

But the Sikhs, I feel, do not very much appreciate the conferring 
of the so-called benefits of this Code on them. My friend Sardar 
Hukam Singh is ready to give up the so-called benefits of the Hindu 
Code now being conferred upon the Sikhs. So long as he remains 
a Sikh, I do not think he would very much appreciate the Hindu 
Code being applied to him and 

Shri Tyagi : He can become a Hindu. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : But let Sardar Hukam Singh speak 
for his own community. I am only 

Shri Khurshed Lai : Yes, you are speaking for yours. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Then we come to part (c)(1) which 
says that the Code applies to any child, legitimate or illegitimate 
etc. A Hindu is a Hindu and the child of a Hindu should also 
be a Hindu. But what I say is this. Sub-clause (2) seems to be 
somewhat misplaced, because it states that the Code applies also 
to any other person who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or Jew 
by religion. Looking at it from the drafting point of view, this is 
a circuitous way of drafting the thing, and it shows the piece- 
meal introduction of an idea. If this is the idea, why not say 
straight away that all persons who are not Muslims, Christians, 
Parsis or Jews are Hindus ? Instead of doing that, you first of 
all say that Hindus are first of all Hindus. Then you say that 
Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs are Hindus and then you say that the 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


838 


838 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Code will apply to other persons who are not Muslims, Christians, 
Parsis or Jews. I think the most straightforward and logical way 
of putting this definition would have been to say that all persons 
who are not Muslims, Christians, Parsis or Jews are Hindus. It 
comes to that. Therefore, I submit, at that time, there might have 
been some hesitation in the mind of the draftsmen and this idea 
was introduced at a later stage. Otherwise there was nothing to 
prevent them from saying what they actually meant. 

But there is a snag in this clause 2, sub-clause (2). Does it 
necessarily follow that a man who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi 
or Jew is a Hindu ? He may be a communist, as is suggested by 
a friend here. Or he may belong to the religion of Shintoism as 
professed in Japan. Or he may have no religion at all. How can 
it be accepted as an inexorable principle that a man must be a 
Christian, Parsi, Muslim, Jew or a Hindu ? There may be a person 
who belongs to no religion, or there may be a person whose religion 
is apart from any of these great religions. 

Shri Tyagi : Hinduism is a cocktail of all religions. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Of course, to say that all the rest 
belong to the Hindu religion may sound very sweet to Hindu ears. 
But the question is whether we should force the so-called benefits 
of this Code on anybody ? Should we call anyone a Hindu and 
force the Code on him ? That is the point. Suppose there are some 
foreigners here, or their servants or subordinates or friends. We are 
encouraging tourist traffic and we can expect many such persons 
in India. And suppose one such foreigner dies while in India. Who 
will inherit his wealth ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : You will inherit his wealth if he dies in India. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : The question is, are those persons who 
do not belong to any of those religions to be the victims upon whom 
the so called benefits of this Hindu Code should be forced ? The 
Hindu community is docile and in an absolute minority in the House, 
but outside there is a great deal of objection raised and that being 
the case, should these so-called benefits be forced on all ? Should 
you force the Code upon all the persons who are neither Muslims, 
Christians, Parsis or Jews, and because they do not belong to any 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


839 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 839 

of these religions, does it necessarily follow that they belong to 
the Hindu religion ? Should the Code be applied to them ? That is 
the question which the House will have to answer. I submit that 
this sub clause (2) must be omitted because it seeks to enact a 
proposition which should not be accepted. Let us proceed gradually. 
You must not force the Code upon such persons. There may be 
some who follow some other religion or who have no religion at 
all, or a new religion may come into the world and to them the 
law should not be made applicable. The application of the law 
should be gradual. The impact of this tremendous measure should 
be gradual. In fact I was very much enamoured with part of the 
amendment moved by my hon. friend Mr. Kapoor. There was a 
great deal of sense in that part of the amendment which said that 
the Code should apply only to those persons who want it. That 
was also the purport of the amendment of Shri Jhunjhunwala. Of 
course there were some differences with regard to detail. But the 
important principle is that the Code should apply only to those 
who want it to be applied to them. Therefore this definition of a 
Hindu is not warranted. If the Hindu Code was not a controversial 
one and had been an acceptable one to all there would have been 
no difficulty. So by accepting that part of the amendment 

Pandit Krishna Chandra Sharma (Uttar Pradesh) : It means 
that everybody should be allowed to make a law for himself. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : You are trying to force down the 
throat of a person a medicine which he does not like. However 
good the Code may be you cannot force it down the throat of the 
Hindu community. 

An Hon. Member : Who says that ? We all want it. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : First of all you must take public 
opinion on your side. You must approach them gradually. Make 
it first optional and then if the law is good for everybody they 
will gravitate towards it. They will themselves push each other 
and compete with each other in getting themselves registered 
earliest. The law should attract people voluntarily and not by force. 
That is the great principle which underlies these amendments 
and suggestions. It is not a case of everybody making a law for 
himself but a case of a few persons forcing a law upon 33 crores 
of people 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


840 


840 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

An Hon. Member : Who are you to say that ? 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : That is also lately the correct position. 
Go ahead. Let them shout at the top of their voice. 

Mr. Chairman : Hon. members should not go on speaking to each 
other while sitting. It will create confusion. Let the hon. Member 
proceed. 

Shri Nazir uddin Ahmad : That is why I heartily support the 
suggestion to make the application of the Code voluntary thereby 
robbing it of its sting. Then I dare say that if the law is good gradually 
every one will come to it. I therefore submit that the law should be 
made applicable to those who are fit for it. 

India is a vast sub-continent where there are highly advanced 
people as also extremely backward people. The law is a good law to 
hon. Members because it is good to the community from which most 
of the Members come. It is an advanced law suited to the advanced 
community from which hon. Members come. But why should it be 
made applicable to hill tribes, aboriginals and backward people who 
have no education and who do not even have two meals a day. Why 
should it be made applicable to them by a stroke of the pen against 
their wishes ? That is the point which arises out of the suggestions 
contained in these two amendments. It is experience and not logic 
that should guide law. I therefore submit that the law should be 
made applicable to those who accept it and those who are fit for it. 
Gradually those who are semi-fit for it will qualify for it 

Shri Khurshed Lai : That is why it is not being applied to you. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I agree that I am too backward to 
appreciate the benefits of this law. This law is a jumble. It does not 
contain much of the Hindu law. It is borrowed from the Muslim law, 
from the Christian law and borrowed all the worst elements of those 
laws. Therefore I would prefer to be called a backwardman so as to 
please my hon. friend Mr. Kurshed Lai rather than be looked upon 
as civilised and be made to accept a law which is not applicable to 
me and which does not appeal to me either. The great difficulty is 
that the Government is committed to a principle rather prematurely 
and the people outside are against it 

Shri Bharati : Who are you to say that ? Who said that ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Just go out and see. If you had gone to 
the Gandhi Grounds yesterday you would have seen something of that. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


841 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 841 

An hon. Member : Why did my hon. friend go there ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : It is my business to be informed : not to 
suggest anything to them, not to control, guide nor mislead them. It is for 
me as a Member to ascertain public opinion. If I know that Hindu opinion 
moves in a particular way, even at the risk of being called backward I 
would bring it to the notice of the House. There is no point in trying to be 
fashionable and clever at the cost of commonsense and equity. 

Some hon. Members asked me in an oblique manner, “Who says so ?”. 
They think that the Hindu community has accepted the Code and are 
agreeable to it. I come from Bengal. At the request of the Government of 
their opinion they said that they were opposed to it 

Shrimati Renuka Ray (West Bengal) : What have they said now ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : If they are changing, I do not know about that. 

Shrimati Durgabai : You too must change along with them. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I do not think they have expressed any 
recent opinion. Apart from rumours their legal opinion duly approved by 
the Government has been sent by their Judicial Secretary and it has been 
circulated to us. Any other opinion has not been circulated to us. If they 
have been circulated to the private ears of any Members I cannot take any 
notice of it here. The Government of Bengal is against the Bill. The big 
people are against it. 

Shri Sondhi (Punjab) : They have compromised, I am told. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I do not think they have put themselves in a 
compromising position at all. Go to any Bar Association and listen to what 
they talk. They are getting tired of it. The very eagerness with which the 
Bill is sought to be pushed through the House 

An Hon. Member : Is it all relevant to the amendment ? 

Mr. Chairman : I would draw attention to amendment No. 31. It is 
quite relevant. 

Shrimati Durgabai : He is only repeating himself. 

Shri Tyagi : Since the Hon. Member has alleged that the Bengal 
Government was against this Hindu Code I want to know from him if the 
Chief Secretary of the Bengal Government is opposed to it ? 

Shri Khurshed Lai : He is not the Government of Bengal. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : The Government of India circulated 
the Bill and asked for opinion. The various State Governments gave 
their opinion and those opinions have been circulated to us. I have 
no private communication with the Bengal Government. The public 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


842 


842 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

opinions which have been circulated to us are there, any hon. Member 
can see them. There you will find that the Bengal Government opposes 
the Bill. 

Pandit Malaviya (Uttar Pradesh) : Why should they see if it is 
not convenient to them ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : They find that the law is not convenient 
to Bengal soil. What is more, all the judges of the Calcutta High 
Court — I suppose they should be regarded as educated people, not 
orthodox, not the rabble, they are fine, cultured, intelligent men. They 
are not mere orthodox men — gave their opinion jointly that they are 
opposed to the Bill. 

Shri Raj Bahadur : May I know, Sir, whether it is permissible for 
the member to attack the very foundation and principle of the Bill 
now ? Is he speaking on clause 2 or on the whole Bill ? 

Sardar Hukam Singh : It was an answer to the interruption on 
his statement that Hindus did not want it. 

Mr. Chairman : Order, order. So far the observations of the hon. 
Member were relevant under amendment No. 31. But at the same 
time I would request him not to be very general in his remarks. He 
ought to confine his observations to the particular points made out by 
him in his amendment. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : The point before us is whether the law 
should be made applicable to persons who do not agree to be bound 
by it. If you do not give the option you will be forcing the law upon 
people who do not want it. That is why I thought that in order to 
strengthen that point the objection of eminent authorities like High 
Court Judges and the Government of Bengal was relevant. It shows 
that the people are against it — not the backward people but intelligent, 
civilised people who have some status in society. That was my purpose 
in referring to it. 

I, therefore, submit that in view of all these objections, the law 
should be made applicable to those who are particularly enamoured 
of it, who think they will be benefited by it, but it should not be 
made applicable to one and all to those who do not want it. I submit 
that those who are opposed to the Hindu Code Bill are a minority in 
the House, but those who are in favour of the Bill are a microscopic 
minority in the country. The whole question is : is it enough for you 
to be fired with the idea that the Hindu Code is a good thing if the 
people do not want it ? In a democratic society you must not force 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


843 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 843 

a benefit upon those who do not want it. The people do not want it. 
Therefore, you must not force this upon them. I therefore heartily 
support the two suggestions made by the two hon. Members that 
the law should be made applicable first to those who want it. Then 
if we find that there is ready acceptance, that it is palatable to 
the Hindus, that they want it, that they readily accept it, then 
this Parliament may later on extend it do other people or to other 
classes of people. That should be the proper way. As has been 
suggested, if once we accept this principle, make its application 
voluntary, the whole controversy will vanish. The bitterness of the 
majority outside and the minority in this House will disappear at 
once. Then there will be no question of a difference of opinion. If it 
is good it is good for the highest class of society. It is not good to 
the condition of people who belong to the middle classes and to the 
lower classes. It is for this reason that I think that the suggestion 
in that amendment should be accepted. 

Then, one of my amendments is that sub-clause (3) should be 
omitted. That sub-clause runs to the effect that : 

“The expression ‘Hindu’ in any portion of this Code shall be construed 

as if it included a person who, though not a Hindu by religion is, 

nevertheless, governed by the provisions of this Code.” 

It says in effect that though a man is not a Hindu, if the Code 
applies to him he is a Hindu. It begs the very question. It could 
have been said a Hindu is a Hindu ! The draftsman was not satisfied 
and he tried to make confusing words confounded by the addition 
of sub-clause (3). To whom would you make the Code applicable ? 
If you say a man is a man who is a human being it does not help 
anyone. It simply shows some confusion of mind. You cannot say 
that a Hindu is not a Hindu but that although he is not a Hindu 
provided the Code applies to him he is a Hindu. I think a simpler 
way of approach should have been far more satisfctory and better. 
If you say all persons having two legs and two hands are Hindus 
I have no objection. If you say all Hindus are Hindus even that 
would have made some sense. You say, all Hindus are Hindus, all 
Jains, Buddhists, and Sikhs are Hindus, the illegitimate children 
of those are Hindus and then all those are Hindus who are not 
Muslims, Christians, Parsis or Jews. You are not satisfied with 
this round-about and circumlocutory way of expression. You say 
that even though a man is not a Hindu he is a Hindu if this Code 
applies to him. You should be more straightforward, more logical, 
more clear in your expression. The draftsmanship of this clause 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


844 


844 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

shows the hand of many a person but it has not been properly drafted. 
That is why there has been so much of confusion, so much of roundabout 
expression. I therefore submit that sub-clause (3) should be omitted. A 
Hindu should be a Hindu, one who follows the Hindu religion. With 
regard to Buddhists, Jainas and Sikhs, I should quite agree to them 
being included provided the Buddhists, Jainas and Sikhs agree to be 
bound by the Hindu Code. Those persons also are Hindus who are not 
Muslims, Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion. But you say that a person 
is a Hindu, though he is not a Hindu, if he is bound by this Code. 
Somehow or other that is a most unsatisfactory way of approach. 

Shri Tyagi: He is a de jure if not a de facto Hindu. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : If you want to call a person a “Hindu”, 
5 p M I have no objection. That is a simple way. You simply 

enumerate him as “Hindu”. Why this circumlocutory, round- 
about and circuitous way of expressing it ? It shows, I say with respect, 
some confusion of thought. 

Dr. Amhedkar : You are more confounded than anybody else in this 
House, I am afraid. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I have other amendments which I shall 
try to deal with tomorrow, if I am not interrupted like this. 

The House then adjourned till a Quarter to Eleven of the clock on 
Tuesday, the 6th February, 1951. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 845 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 845 

HINDU CODE — contd. 

*Mr. Speaker : The house will now proceed with the further 
consideration of the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of 
the Hindu Law, as reported by the Select Committee. Clause 2 was 
under discussion. Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad will continue his speech. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal) : Sir, at the very 
outset the House is in a very hilarious mood. I believe the subject 
is extremely important and it requires very grave consideration. 
Yesterday I dealt with some of my amendments. I shall now come 
to amendment No. 31 which reads: 

After sub-clause (4) of clause 2 add the following new sub-clause : 

“(5) Notwithstanding anything in this section this Code shall apply 

only to such areas or to such persons or classes of persons in any 

state from such time or by such stages as the State Legislature may 

from time to time by Act provide.” 

The Bill is highly controversial and it is improper even for those 
who believe it to be highly beneficial to the country to force this 
Bill upon the entire Hindu population. I submit that this House 
should not take this hasty step. I do not contend that this House 
has no jurisdiction, but I do submit that this House should not 
take upon itself the serious responsibility of forcing a law upon an 
unwilling people. This House was specially constituted to obtain 
independence from the British Government, and in due course 
through its constituent side it passed the Constitution. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : Sir, is this relevant at 
this stage ? I do not like to interfere in the debate but certainly 
we have spent more than four hours in discussing a single clause. 

Mr. Speaker : I was just watching for a minute or two whether 
the hon. Member’s reference was leading to some sound argument 
that he was coming to. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I was submitting that this 
House has not the mandate of the country to pass this 
Bill. This is a fundamental matter affecting the religious 
and social structure of India. Therefore, it is proper and 
relevant to consider our exact position. I am not going 
elaborately into all the history because that has been done at 


P.D. Vol. VIII, Part II, 6th February 1951, pp. 2425-83. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


846 


846 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the proper stage, but I cannot forget the fact that a large number 
of hon. Members of this House are new Members and were not 
present at that stage. So, a very brief resume of those points may, 
I submit, be not irrelevant. 

Mr. Speaker : I may inform the hon. Member that, so far as 
the representative character of this House is concerned as also 
its competency to consider such a Bill, that has been sufficiently 
thrashed out before and the present stage is not the proper stage 
of again raising that kind of an argument. We are now discussing 
the Bill clause by clause and clause 2 is before the House, so, he 
will restrict his remarks only to the provisions in clause 2 and the 
amendments before the House. Of course, the scope for that is wide 
enough, but not for questioning or even doubting the representative 
character of the House or its capacity to pass this Bill. That will 
be unnecessarily repeating what was said at the previous stages. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, I bow down to your ruling. I am 
not at all questioning the representative character of the House 
or its competency. But the question is that we have not consulted 
the people. Not that we have no jurisdiction, not that we do not 
represent the people, but on a social legislation of an all-embracing 
character like this we should have obtained some mandate. That was 
the point which I was going to submit. I do not wish to elaborate 
it. I wished to refer to this matter in order to develop my argument 
with regard to amendment No. 31. I want by this amendment to 
restrict the application of the Bill to the different States, upon 
the State, by Act, prescribing its application, and also limiting the 
conditions on which the Bill should apply, the persons or classes 
of persons to whom the Bill should apply and the stage or stages 
through which this application should come. Therefore, my point, 
so far as this amendment is concerned, is that the Bill should not 
be made applicable to all persons outright. 

The State Government are in a better position to know the 
conditions of the people, their wishes and desires and their 
needs. It is therefore proper to allow each State to apply 
the Law and to such extent and through such stages as the 
Legislature, by Act, may provide. I know that so far as reports 
are concerned the Government of Bengal has opposed this bill. 
Though it was given out yesterday that in private conversation 
some hon. Member was told, some individual Minister in 
Bengal was in favour of the Bill, that is not the official position 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


847 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 847 

taken by the Government of Bengal. I dare say that each State has 
its different problems to solve with regard to this Bill: its stage 
of civilisation, its state of economic condition and various other 
factors must, I believe, obtain in different degrees and in different 
circumstances in the different States. My point is that for those hon. 
Members who feel that this Bill is good there are a much larger 
number of hon. Members who feel the Bill is not good for them. 
Therefore, my submission would be to strike a via media . Let the 
Bill be accepted by those who think that it is good for them, but 
let them not force the Bill upon others. 

Now, so far as the States are concened, the State Legislatures 
would be the proper authority to apply law, adapting the application 
to suit the differing circumstances of the case. Though the Hon. 
Minister in charge of the Bill is enamoured of uniformity in the 
laws, I think that it is a principle which should yield to practical 
considerations. I submit that the State Legislatures are the 
proper authority to ascertain the Actual opinion on the Bill and 
the application of the Bill should also be controlled by them. To 
this principle, there should be no objection. If, as is claimed, the 
Bill is a very beneficial one, acceptable to the people, acceptable 
to the Hindus of India, nothing could be lost by letting the State 
Legislatures express their opinion. The State Governments have 
their Departments through which they are in a position to know 
the wishes of the people and the members of the State Legislatures 
are also in a position to know the minds of the people. I therefore, 
submit that the application of the Bill in different circumstances 
and to different people should be left to the local Legislatures. If 
this is done, then much of the sting about the Bill and much of 
the objectionable features of the Bill would at once disappear and 
the controversy would immediately stop. The more the supporters 
of the Bill are convinced that the Bill is highly acceptable, the 
more they should be ready to subject themselves to this test of 
acceptance of the Bill by the local legislatures. I submit that this 
amendment raises an important principle and if the claims are as 
high as they are alleged then this principle should be accepted. It 
is conceivable that there are corners in the States where this law 
would Act adversely. There are various provisions bearing on divorce 
and there are various customs in different parts of the country for 
marriage and divorce. If we apply this Bill to them straightaway, that 
would take away the simplified marriage and simplified divorce and 
substitute complicated forms of divorce and marriage. To that extent, 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 


848 


848 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

their existing rights would be affected. There are, again, people who 
do not like to enjoy the rights of marriage and divorce as prescribed in 
this Bill. To them also, it would be a hardship. From any point of view, 
therefore, the application of this law to the peculiar circumstances of 
each State must be left to the local Legislature. 

Then Sir, I have been jeered and jibed at many times. 

12 Noon 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh (Bihar) : No. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : That has been my privilege. I believe that 
the delay that has occurred was due to two reasons, the author of both 
the reasons being Dr. Ambedkar himself. First of all the Bill was sent 
to the Select Committee. For reasons best known to him, it came back 
from the Select committee in the form of an altogether new Bill. That led 
to some controversy, which took about six months’ time. I submit that 
this portion of the delay was not due to me. If I had any fault, it was to 
point out the error and thereafter it was for the House to give a ruling. 

Shri B. Das (Orissa) : Why apologise ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : That delay was due to Dr. Ambedkar 
himself. I do not blame him for this. I do not attribute any motive to him. 

Dr. Ambedkar : He forgives me! 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Probably, he wanted to improve matters 
and make matters worse. 

The next reason for the delay was 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not think any hon. Member of this House has 
charged my hon. friend with dilatory tactics and I do not see why he 
should indulge in an explanation which is certainly not wanted, so far 
as I am concerned. He is wasting time. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : No, Sir. At least one word by way of 
explanation is necessary. Although I might not have referred to it, the 
charge has definitely been made and it goes in the proceedings to be read 
even after 100 years. I submit that the next reason for the delay was that in 
the Bill which was referred to the Select Committee, there were enormous 
numbers of substantial changes and those matters had to be put before the 
House just to argue that the members of the Select Committee had not a 
proper opportunity to consider them in detail. Those controversies are gone, 
but public memory is short and Ministerial memory is shorter. By a strange 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 849 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 849 

coincidence, by a strange freak of fate, the delay is attributed to 
me. I think it is quite unnecessary to take it up and discuss it. So 
far as this matter is concerned, as Dr. Pattabhi Sitaramayya said 
on one occasion, dilatory tactics are permissible. If any Member is 
satisfied that a Bill must be opposed, dilatory tactics are permissible. 
He may oppose — so long as he may — fairly, and even unfairly, if 
he must. I submit that I do not take recourse to this extreme step. 
I believe that the Bill is a controversial one and therefore some 
amount of controversy is inevitable. The controversy is embedded 
in the Bill itself. 

Dr. Deshmukh (Madhya Pradesh) : In Dr. Ambedkar ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Yes, of course. When the draft Bill was 
circulated, the Hindu Law Commission went round the country and 
collected a large number of opinions. The opinions were preponderantly 
against the Bill. These very women who are supposed to be anxious 
to liberate themselves through this Bill opposed the sittings of that 
Commission in different places in large numbers. 

Shri Tyagi (Uttar Pradesh) : Clause 2 is now under discussion; 
what has all this to do with it ? 

Mr. Speaker : The Chair is taking care of it. But if hon. Members 
want to do so, they may ; but in that case his speech will be prolonged 
and may go on till tomorrow evening. Therefore, let him go on in 
his own way. If he is irrelevant, the Chair will stop him. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Sir, it is these interruptions which 
certainly create a certain amount of difficulty. When a question is 
asked, it certainly requires an answer. After all I am accustomed 
to these interruptions and nothing is more acceptable to me than 
these interruptions. 

Sir, clause 2 is a very important one because it deals with the 
application of the Code. Many amendments have been suggested 
to this clause, the underlying idea of all of them being to prevent 
its universal application straightaway, considering the magnitude 
of the legislation, I for one feel that the house should take serious 
consideration of the suggestion to proceed slowly and to adapt the 
Bill to suit local conditions. If that is done, the impact of the Bill 
would be more tolerable and the objections would largely vanish. 


Sir, I have done. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-01.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>24-12-2013 850 

850 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

*Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab): Sir, in regard to the 
application of the Hindu Code to the various subjects and peoples 
who come within the purview of clause 2, I have to submit for your 
consideration a few words. 

I agree with the previous speaker that the scope of clause 2 is very 
wide and therefore, all these matters which have been submitted for 
the consideration of the course are quite appropriate and should be 
considered by the House in regard to application of clause 2. But at 
the same time, I am of opinion that by practical considerations we are 
compelled to limit the scope of clause 2 to such persons to whom the 
Hindu law applied previously. I am not here to minimise the efforts of 
those who think that in pursuance of the directive principles we ought 
to have a Civil Code for this country. I am for it, the whole country 
is for it. We should, therefore endeavour to have a Civil Code for the 
whole country and I would very much like that Hon. Dr. Ambedkar 
who has done so much for this country in the matter of giving us a 
Constitution and bringing forward the Hindu Code which affects about 
thirty crores of people will in time bring forth a new Civil Code for 
the whole country. 

But at the same time I do not think it is practicable to say that 
this Hindu Code should be turned into a Civil Code, (an Hon. Member; 
Why not ?) The question is being asked “ Why not ?”. I would certainly 
submit the reason. Now, as I have just pointed out. I admire the 
spirit of the previous speakers Mr. Sarwate, Shri Vidyavachaspati 
and Shri Jaspat Roy Kapoor, when they want one Civil Code for the 
whole country. As a matter of Act this attempt of Dr. Ambedkar in 
incorporating certain principles which ought to have been the real basis 
of the Hindu Code is simply laudable. This Hindu Code, according to 
some, is a Code which ought not to apply to Hindus alone, because 
this Hindu Code embodies principles which are not taken from the 
Hindu law alone. In regard to certain principles, they are so broad 
based that I should think they may eventually furnish a basis for 
having a Civil Code. 

As remarked by the previous speaker, marriage is certainly one 
of the ten samskars. It is a religious affair. But in this Code we 
have ‘got the provisions of the Civil Marriage Act also. My humble 
submission is that so far as the question of Civil Marriage is concerned 
it ought to have been contained in the Civil Code which we have 
all in view and which will be equally good for all the citizens of 


P.D., Vol. VIII, Part II, 6th February 1951, pp. 2430-52. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


851 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 851 

this country. Therefore, the complaint that this Hindu Code is neither 
based on Hindu Law nor on any universal law is correct to a certain 
extent and my view is that the principles of the Civil Marriage 
Act which are embodied in the Act of 1872 should not have been 
incorporated in the Hindu Code. I would, therefore, very much like 
that these provisions are taken away and the Hindu Code remained 
only a Hindu Code. This inter-mixing of the principles of the Civil 
Marriage Act into the Hindu Code should not have been allowed. 

Now, Sir, I maintain that today we cannot have a Hindu law 
like the one which was propounded by our ancestors. In those days 
Hindus lived in an exclusive way. The impact of civilization and 
other religions had not begun so far as Hindus were concerned. Now 
in every Code, in the Muslim Law, in the Christian Law, and in the 
Hindu law we have got principles which are not germane to those 
laws alone but which as a matter of Act have been made universal 
by the impact of other forces. For instance in this Hindu Code we 
have got monogamy which is a special feature of the Christian 
Law. The authors of the Hindu Code want that daughters should 
be given a share of the property. Now this was not known to Hindu 
law, so far as married daughters were concerned for a very long 
time. Of course, there is no practice or principle which has not been 
experimented upon at one time or other by the Hindus. 

[Shrimati Durgabai in the chair ] 

This is a different matter. But today I think he will be a 
bold man who would like to say that the principles of yore be 
introduced in the Hindu Code. As the society progresses there is 
also a progress of the principles. Now if anybody wants to say 
that the laws of Manu should be introduced in Republican India, 
I think he will be a mad man. Does any one in this House want 
that no Shudra should be allowed to read the Shrutis ? On the 
contrary, I for one welcome the Code for the very reason that 
Dr. Ambedkar is supporting it. Now all things have changed and 
all values have changed. The Hindus have burnt their boats so far. 
Now he will be a bold man who will come and say, “ I want that 
the Caste system of the Hindus based, as it is, on birth should 
be introduced in the Hindu Code”. I will have noting to do with 
this Hindu Code if it is based on the caste theory. I know that so 
far as the original Hindu law is concerned the caste system was 
not based on birth. I challenge anybody in this house, or outside, 
if he could convince me that the Hindu Law or the system of the 
Hindus was based on birth. But what do we find today ? Birth 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


852 


852 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is the real basis of caste, whereas according to the strict notions of 
Hindu law and the Shastras, birth has no place in it whatsoever, we 
find that Hindu society is not what it used to be. Are we now going to 
introduce all those laws of Manu, for instance, that a Shudra cannot 
read the Shrutis etc.? Now we have finished with them. 

So far as the criticism goes that the Code is very bad, so bad that it 
should apply only to Hindus, Muslims, etc., I am very sorry I have to 
challenge that statement and fight it. Some of the principles which are 
put in the bill are exceptionally good, so good that I would like to have 
this Hindu Code. As I stated. I am not an opponent of every clause 
and word in it. I want that all the good principles, which are consistent 
with the principles that we have accepted in our society today, should 
be passed in this House. I am opposed to certain provisions and I shall 
have occasion to speak about them at the proper time. But as regards 
the statement that it is so bad that it should not apply to Hindus or 
Muslims, etc. I for one do not agree with that statement. 

I was considering the question whether it should apply to any but 
Hindus. Three or four motions have been made, by Mr. Sarwate, 
Mr. Indra Vidyavachaspati and Mr. Jaspat Roy Kapoor had something 
to say about it. In regard to them my submission is that, if it were 
possible to do so I would have myself supported those motions. But may 
I humbly ask the non-Hindus in the House if they like this proposal ? 
They do not like it. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh) : The non-Hindus have already 
been brought within its scope. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : It is entirely wrong to suggest 
that. So far as Muslims, Christians, Parsis and Jews are concerned, 
it specifically say that the law shall not apply to them. Where is my 
friend’s suggestion that it has already been applied to Muslims Christians, 
Parsis and Jews ? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : I said non-Hindus excepting Muslims, Christians 
etc. 

Mr. Chairman : Let there be no interruptions. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri (Assam) : On a point of information, Madam, 
may I know whether the Hindu Law is not applicable even now to the 
Muslims, Bohras and Cutch-Memons ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : My friend has anticipated me. The 
present Hindu Law as we understand it does apply to many classes 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


853 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 853 

of persons. It does apply to persons who do not call themselves 
Hindus. And so long they have never objected to it. So far as Sikhs, 
Jains, Buddhists are concerned, it is the Hindu Law which is applied 
to them. And it has been applied to them from times immemorial, 
from the time that the British Government was established. They 
have always been using it. Even Muslims have been using it. 
(An hon. Member-. You are excluding them). We are not going to 
exclude them. This Hindu Code, according to clause 2, shall apply 
to all persons who are not Muslims, Christians, Parsi or Jews. So 
far as Muslims are concerned and so far as their law is concerned 
we have not changed anything and we have not made any law for 
them. We do not want to say that their customs as altered by the 
Hindu Law do not exist. 

For instance take the Punjab. We were not bound by the Hindu 
Law as such, I am speaking of the villages of the Punjab. So far as 
the cities are concerned, many Hindus and Muslims are governed 
by the Hindu and Muslim Law. But so far as the rest of the Punjab 
is concerned we were guided or dominated, or we were governed, 
by custom. Custom was the first rule of decision in the Punjab so 
far as Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs were concerned. Even today it 
is custom which governs us. May I with your permission, Madam, 
just read out the Preliminary Section of the Punjab Customary 
Law by Rattigan ? it says : 

“Custom in this Province is the first rule of decision in all questions 
regarding succession, special property of females, betrothal, marriage, 
divorce, dower, adoption, guardianship, minority, bastardy, family 
relations, wills, legacies, gifts, partitions, any religious usage or 
institution, or alluvion and diluvion .” 

In regard to the Customary Law of the Punjab, all the Hindus, 
Muslims and Sikhs in the village areas were bound by the Customary 
Law which practically was the same for all. And it has furnished 
a very good basis for the Civil Code because the customs were the 
same, the result was that we were wedded to the agnatic theory of 
succession and all the customs flowed from that. It is difficult for the 
Punjabis to accept the principle of inheritance of married daughters 
because the agnatic theory is there. In fact it prevailed in Assam 
also before Assam came into the domain of the Bengal High Court. 
If we find out what was the source of custom, all the principles and 
notions of Hindu Law which prevailed throughout the country were 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


854 


854 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the source from which this custom grew in the Punjab and in other 
parts. Not that custom is an exclusive feature of the Punjab only : 
in various parts of India custom has to a very great extent altered 
the original Hindu Law. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : I am sorry to interrupt. But may I ask 
whether the Customary Law in the Punjab will over ride the clear 
provisions of the Hindu Law, or what will be the position of the 
Punjab later, that is, after this Bill is passed ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : So far as the Punjab Law is 
concerned, I have given the source of law, i.e., section 5 of the Punjab 
Laws Act. I have just read from section 1 from the preliminary 
observations of Rattigan which is based on the Regulation of 1825 
and section 5 of the Act of 1872, so far as Punjab is concerned. 
This is the present Law of the Punjab unless it is altered by this 
Hindu Code. This was my difficulty when I gave an amendment 
to that effect: leave the Punjabees if they want to be governed by 
their own custom. I have given an amendment in regard to clause 1 
to the effect that Punjab should be excluded from the operation. 
The reason is that from days immemorial we have been governed by 
custom and we want to stick to that custom because that custom is 
the mixture of the Hindu Law as well as other notions of Civil Law. 

I may be excused if I just divert for a minute to the present 
mentality of the Hindus, as a whole. I want to see a Hindu in 
this country who can say that he is a Hindu according to the old 
notions of Hinduism. The present mentality of the educated Hindus 
of this country is a sort of electicism. They are followers of Arya 
Samaj, Brahmo Samaj, some people have in the background of 
their minds or in the inner sub-conscience, certain conceptions 
which we have imbibed from Muslims, Christians and from other 
religions and we educated Hindus — I can speak for myself and 
some of my friends — want to have a sort of electicism. We take 
the best out of every religion and begin to think that this is the 
right thing and that this is Hinduism. Perhaps this may be true 
of the rest of the world also. Where is a true Christian to day 
who believes in the teachings of the Bible ? I can quote from the 
Muhammadan Law also. Where is the true Muhammadan to be 
found ? We know that the Prophet of Muhammadans married 
a girl who was below the age of 14. When the Sarda Act was 
passed, if hon. Members of this House remember very well, 
Mr. Mohemad Ali performed a marriage in the Queen’s Garden just 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


855 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 855 

to contravene the provisions of the Sarda Act because people wrote 
that the Sarda Act had made an inroad on the Muslim religion by 
taking away the liberty of marrying a minor. Those persons who have 
prejudices about religions may say whatever they like but to-day at 
the present moment, there is no orthodox Hinduism, no orthodox 
Muhammadanism and no orthodox Christianity. This is the bare 
truth and therefore, I am not surprised if Dr. Ambedkar has brought 
in a Bill which is consistent with the present times. Many of these 
provisions look new to those who are absolutely orthodox but at the 
same time, we must recognize that we have progressed too much on 
the lines of modern civilization and we cannot go back. If they want 
to bring back all those ideas of the past which have been practically 
given up by society in general, they are mistaken. As a matter of 
fact, Dr. Ambedkar has made an unconscious attempt 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : We are getting more and more confused 
by what the hon. Member is saying. I want to make it clear whether 
the hon. Member wants that the present Hindu Code should go 
to amend the Punjab Customary Law and whether in the Punjab 
Customary law bigamy is banned or not. If bigamy is not banned 
and if as the hon. Member wants to have the Punjab to be excluded 
from the operation of the Hindu Code, may I know his views about 
bigamous marriage ? 

Mr. Chairman : The hon. Member should know that he has already 
made his point clear and the hon. Member who is now speaking 
may be allowed to have his say and he need not be interrupted 
from time to time. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am very glad that my hon. 
Friend has put a question to me. So far as bigamy is concerned. I have 
made my position absolutely clear when some time back I introduced 
a Bill in this House. That bill is designed to enforce monogamy in 
the whole of India even as regards Muslims, Hindus, Christians 
and everybody and including the Punjab. I want that so far as this 
Customary law is concerned, if there are any such customs which 
agree with the accepted ideals of society and humanity as a whole 
or a major part of that society, then those ideals we should adopt. 
I want that there should be no bigamy in the Punjab or elsewhere. 
This is my humble reply. So far as the general question that he has 
put is concerned whether this Hindu Code should modify a custom 
or not, I am of the opinion that so far as our custom is concerned, 
I want to stick to it in the Punjab, and we want to go on with that 
custom. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


856 


856 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

So far as custom and other things are concerned, if my hon. Friend 
has just studied the amendments which I have already given, he would 
see that I want good customs in all places should remain as they are, 
because I am not in favour of violently changing the law of the people 
of this land in this manner in which this Hindu Code seeks to do {Hear, 
hear). At the same time, I do not want some portions of this Hindu Code 
to be enacted for the whole of India. Since I got an applause with a 
view to pin me to something which I do not myself like, I want to make 
it absolutely clear that I am not against this Hindu Code. I want that 
certain portions of it should be enacted, but there are certain portions 
which I do not like, {Interruption). So far as certain principles in this 
Hindu Code are concerned, which are of a universal nature which will 
improve the society, I want that those provisions should apply to the 
Punjab and it is for this reason I am supporting this amendment. Hon. 
Members have not read the amendments which I have already given. 
The amendment runs thus: — 

That for clause 2, the following be substituted, namely : 

“ 2. Subject to the provisions of section 1 this Code applies — 

(a) to all persons who are Hindus, Buddhists, Jains or Sikhs by 
religion ; 

(b) to any other person who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsee or 
a Jew by religion ; 

(c) to every woman who married any person was not a Muslim, 
Christian, Parsee or a Jew by religion ; 

(d) to any child, legitimate or illegitimate, one of whose parents was 
a person who was not a Muslim, Christian, Parsee or Jew by religion ; 

(e) to a convert to any religion except the Muslim, Christian, Parsee 
or Jew by religion.” 

I want that this Hindu Code Bill as it is amended by this House and 
according to my wishes should apply to the Punjab. I do not want that 
so far as the Punjab is concerned the customs that we have got there 
should be violently changed by this Hindu Code but consistently with 
this I want to adopt such of the provisions of the Hindu Code as are 
acceptable. As for bigamy it should no longer exist in the Punjab. We 
want to have a monogamous Punjab. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : Then I withdraw my applause. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Do I understand the hon. Member to suggest 
that different portions of the country and different sections of the 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


857 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 857 

community should be permitted to pick and choose particular portions 
of the Code wich are acceptable to them ? 

Mr. Chairman : The hon. Member must address the Chair and he 
should put the question through the Chair. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am very glad that Mr. Kapoor 
should have put this question to me. Since I also put a question to 
Mr. Kapoor when he was speaking yesterday, this is tit for tat. I then 
asked Mr. Kapoor when he was speaking whether he wanted that every 
person should have liberty of choosing a particular clause and whether 
he shall be bound or not. His proposition was that out of the Hindu Code 
consisting of so many sections every individual be he a Hindu, Muslim, 
Christian or Parsee or whoever he may be able to choose a particular 
section to bind him and not others. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : On a point of personal explanation, I never 
said that. What I said that of all portions in the Code one should be 
at liberty to pick and choose any particular portion. There are different 
parts relating to marriage, adoption and inheritance etc. It should be 
open to one to pick and choose the part relating to marriage and say : 
“I want to be governed by this chapter.” I never said that one particular 
section should be accepted by one and another section by another. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am very sorry that my hon. Friend 
controverted the statement that I made. I put this question in those very 
words and he replied to that question and his reply was that he would 
rather like that even a particular section could be chosen. Unfortunately, 
he does not remember that. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : I will refer him to the speech which I delivered 
yesterday. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : After reading the section I found 
the very thing that I am submitting. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : I suppose it is not so. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I take it that what my friend says 
is the true version. 

May I humbly ask my Friend whether he wants that a person 
can choose out of the Hindu Code and say that so far as marriage is 
concerned he shall be found by the Hindu Law and so far as succession 
is concerned, he shall be bound by some other law ? That would be 
an impossible proposition for a person to say that he would be bound 
only by one Chapter of the Hindu Code and not by others. The whole 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


858 


858 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

law is so interwoven and interconnected that a person cannot say that 
he would be bound by one provision and not by the other provisions 
in another Chapter. That is entirely a wrong proposition. Succession, 
maintenance, guardianship, all these provisions are, as a matter of fact, 
so inter-connected that it would be impossible to have a proposition 
like that. Yesterday also when I put my question, it was with a view to 
bring into relief the wrong proposition that my hon. friend was wanting 
to lay down for the whole of India. According to him, a Muslim may be 
able to say that he likes a certain Chapter and would be governed by 
that and in respect of the rest, he would be governed by the Muslim 
Law. I ask, is it possible, is it practicable, is it a proposition which 
can be laid before the House ? I submit, not, I submit that that would 
be a wrong approach to the question at issue. In fact, that is not the 
question at issue. 

The question of even a Civil Code, as I have submitted, is not 
germane to the subject. While I admire those who want to have one 
Civil Code for the whole of India, I cannot agree, and I do not think 
that it would be a practical proposition to have one Civil Code for 
Muslims, Christians, Jews, etc. What was the reaction of our friend 
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad ? He never agreed to that. He raised the 
question of fundamental rights under the Constitution, and said that 
you cannot have this Hindu Code. When it came to asking a question 
of him whether he would like to be governed by the Hindu Code, he 
said, “ It is bad enough for the Hindus ; you want to give it to the 
Muslims, Christians, etc.”. That was his attitude. I very humbly submit 
that as a matter of fact, the provisions of the Constitution Act have 
not been fully understood by my hon. friends who propose that this 
Hindu Code should apply to Muslims, Christians, etc. I can understand 
that in a light-hearted spirit. If they want to throw away the Hindu 
Code Bill they may say anything in order to show the absurdity of 
the provisions. But, I do not think that it is a feasible proposition to 
suggest that the Hindu Code should apply to Muslims, Christians, 
Parsis, Jews, etc. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri: The principles. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : My hon. Friend Mr. Chaudhuri 
says, and I think he will again applaud me when I say that the 
principles do apply. I quite agree that some of the principles even of 
the old Hindu Law are of such a universal nature that they apply 
to people of all religions, in all circumstances. So far as that is 
concerned, that would be the basis of the common Civil Code. Even 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


859 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 859 

now, we have certain principles in our present law which are the basis 
of the common Civil Code, like the Sarda Act, Majority Act, etc. 

Reference was made to articles 25 and 15 of the Constitution Act 
and some of the provisions in article 25 were even ridiculed. My hon. 
friend Mr. Nazuriddin Ahmad said that he cannot make anything out 
of the words “Subject to public order, morality and health” and that 
they were meaningless. They are not meaningless. They have not full 
meaning; not only full meaning, but are of very great significance. He 
seems to have failed to realise the significance of articles 25 and 15. 
It was said that under article 15, there shall be no discrimination, and 
that therefore, we cannot have a Hindu Code, a Muslim Code and other 
Codes. My humble submission is this. Although I would very much 
like to have one Civil Code for the whole country. I submit that it is 
not inconsistent with the provisions of the Constitution Act to have a 
Hindu Code, a Muslim Code and other Codes. I am very sorry to say 
that I have heard my hon. friends who are in favour of the Hindu 
Code Bill say that so far as the provisions of Articles 15 and 25 of 
the Constitution Act are concerned the provisions of the Hindu Code 
Bill are not consistent. For instance. I am very sorry to submit that I 
have heard even from the author of the Hindu Code Bill to say that 
so far as the Constitution is concerned, there can be no discrimination 
between brothers and sisters, between a male and a female so far as 
the Hindu Code is concerned. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Only on grounds of sex. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am coming to that. That is one 
proposition that has been put forward that on grounds of sex there 
cannot be any discrimination and article 15 of the Constitution will 
stand in our way. The other gentlemen, who are opposed to the Hindu 
Code, also rely on articles 15 and 25 and say that there can be no 
discrimination. May I humbly ask the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar, if there 
could be no discrimination on the ground of sex, why he has got so 
many provosions in the Hindu Code itself which discriminate between 
the sexes 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is no provision which discriminates only on 
the ground of sex. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : This provision of one-fourth for 
a married daughter and one-half for the unmarried daughter ; why 
is there a different succession if a man dies and a different one if a 
woman dies ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


860 


860 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is not anything based on sex only. 

Shri Tyagi : On death also. 

Mr. Chairman : I think the Select Committee report has made no 
such discrimination. 

Mr. K. C. Sharma (Uttar Pradesh) : That article is not under 
discussion now. He may come to his amendments. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : As a matter of fact, even this 
discrimination that the married daughter may not have a share in 
the father’s property is not based on ground of sex alone, as my hon. 
friend says. My submission is that it is consistent to provide in this 
Hindu Code that a married daughter shall not succeed to her father’s 
property. I was just now on the argument propounded by the Hon. 
Dr. Ambedkar. On the question of maintenance, a wife is entitled to 
be maintained by the husband. Is the husband also entitled to be 
maintained by the wife ? 

Shrimati Renuka Ray (West Bengal) : Why not ? 

An Hon. Member : There are many such instances. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : My hon. Friend asks ; ‘ why not’, 
I am very glad that she has adopted this gallant attitude. Has she 
consulted her sisters ? Our Chairman does not say so. I submit that it 
is a very wrong principle to suggest that on the basis of sex, equality 
should be enforced in such a manner which is not consistent with 
certain conditions of life. I maintain that the Hindu Code would not 
violate any provision if we maintain that a married daughter does not 
succeed to the father’s estate. She succeeds her husband or father-in- 
law. I am dead certain that unless and until we recognise the rights 
of women, unless we give them full rights, we shall be losing very 
much in certain strength of character which arises only if women are 
economically independent. I submitted when I was speaking at the 
consideration stage, and I maintain it now that we are all committed 
to that and we cannot but give rights to our sisters; we must see that 
we give them full rights. The only thing that I am opposing is the 
manner in which those rights are given. 

So far as the Punjab is concerned, as I submitted, we are wedded to 
this theory that a married daughter when she goes to her husband’s 
family, she becomes a part of that family, and is the pivot of that family. 
Therefore, the trouble with the Punjab is that they cannot possibly accept 
that a married daughter should succeed to her father’s estate. So far as 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


861 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 861 

the other principles are concerned, we are still being governed by them 
and as I submitted they are principles which would be a better basis for 
a Civil Code rather than for a Hindu Code. This is not discrimination 
on grounds of sex at all but due to certain conditions of life. Suppose 
you pass a law to-day that all males should cook food and that females 
should not; will that be right ? That will be entirely wrong. 

Pandit Krishna Chandra Sharma (Uttar Prades) : What is the 
clause on which the hon. Member is speaking ? Is all this relevant to 
the clause under discussion ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : You have maternity legislations 
referred to in the Factories Act. Should all that legislation apply to 
males also ? 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : How is all this relevant to clause 2 ? 

Mr. Chairman : Too many Members speaking at the same time leads 
to nothing but confusion. I think the hon. Member now speaking may 
be allowed to go on. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Those who raise the question of 
relevancy, I submit, do not seem to know what is relevant and what 
is not. They have all heard my friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad and he 
covered a very wide ground and in the reply also one has to deal with 
all those points touched upon. You cannot say that, that was relevant 
and this is not. If what he said then was relevant, what I say now is 
also relevant. Moreover, so far as clause 2 is concerned, it is a very wide 
one and so the question of relevancy cannot arise in connection with 
this clause. The question whether the Hindu Code applies to Muslims 
or not was dealt with by Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad, and in views of that, 
I find it impossible to understand how my friend Shri Krishna Chandra 
Sharma — the able lawyer that he is, — can say that what I now say is 
not relevant. 

Shri Raj Bahadur (Rajasthan) : Sir, on a point of order, can an hon. 
Member of the House take the seat of the Leader of the House ? 

Mr. Chairman : The hon. Member may proceed to his own seat. 

Shri Tyagi : What is the matter ? I would like to know why I am 
made the target of this laughter. These seats are, after all for being 
occupied by someone. I found that one was vacant and I occupied it. 

Mr. Chairman : The hon. Member might have exercised his right of 
freedom of movement in this ; but there is no more to be said on this 
matter. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


862 


862 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: The question of equality before 
the law has been raised. And various other matters have also been 
raised. Articles 25 and 15 were referred to and it was stated that 
the provisions of those articles are being violated, that in view of 
those articles, we cannot enact a measure of the nature of the Hindu 
Code. But as a matter of fact, that is not the case. I would submit 
that even with the amendments now suggested by Dr. Ambedkar, 
this section will not read quite well. That is why I have suggested 
my amendments. 

Some complaint was made by my Friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad 
that there is an attempt to apply the Hindu Code to persons who 
are not Hindus. But my humble submission is that my friend is 
not correct in saying that because if my friend takes the trouble to 
see to whom it applies now, he will find that it applies even now 
to many persons who are not Hindus in the sense in which the 
word is popularly understood even to-day. If you look into Gour’s 
Commentary — I think it is page 165 — you will find that a good many 
persons who do not call themselves Hindus are still governed by the 
Hindu law. It governs many who are geographically Hindus, if I may 
say so. The Hindu system is not a creed. The term “ Hindu” has a 
geographical significance also. Therefore, all those who are not bound 
by any other special law like those of Muslims, Christians, Parsis or 
Jews, they are all bound by the Hindu Law. This is no innovation 
brought in by Dr. Ambedkar. He does not want that those who 
are not Hindus should come under the Hindu Law. This argument 
raised by my friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad is a wrong one. It is 
not a question of conversion at all. If the Hindu law applies to a 
person, he does not thereby become a Hindu. If he adopts some of 
the rules of succession, of divorce or marriage of the Hindu Law, he 
does not become a Hindu. And I may also say that this kind of thing 
does not help us either. What is the use of increasing the number 
of Hindus or Muslims ? The days of proportionate representation or 
special representation are all gone. I don’t care if a man is a Hindu 
or a Muslim or Parsi or Jew, as long as he is a good citizen. I do 
not want anyone to give up his religion. The argument of my Friend 
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad is based on the old psychology that the 
proportion of Hindu must be more, or that of Muslims must be less or 
that Parsis should be more and so on and so forth. As a matter of fact 
the subject matter of clause 2 is taken from the old Hindu Law. The 
first part of it says that this Code shall apply to all Hindus, that is to 
say, to all persons professing the Hindu religion in any of its forms or 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


863 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 863 

developments, including Virashaivas etc, But my humble submission 
is that this part of the clause is redundant. If it applies to Hindus, 
that is quite sufficient, and there is no point in saying that it applies 
to all forms of the Hindu religion or developments of the Hindu 
religion. Therefore, in my amendment. I have suggested that this 
Code applies “(a) to all persons who are Hindus, Buddhists, Jains or 
Sikhs by religion.” 

And the next amendment is in the nature of a negative proposition. 
It defines those persons who are not bound by this Code. There is 
the customary law and the special law. For instance the Muslim of 
the Punjab can say, that he is governed by the customary law and 
not by the Shariat. Those laws which apply to Muslims are not at all 
touched by this Code. Those customs are all quite safe. My amendment 
says that it applies : 

(b) “to any other person who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi or 
a Jew by religion 

(c) to every woman who married any person who was not a Muslim, 
Christian, Parsi or a Jew by religion; 

(d) “to any child, legitimate or illegitimate, both of whose parents 
are Hindus within the meaning of this section 

Part (d) I submit is redundant, When there is a child, legitimate 
or illegitimate to parents who are Hindus, then there is no question. 
The child is a Hindu. Not that it is wrong to say that the child is 
a Hindu, but that is quite superfluous. The child of Hindus is ipso 
facto a Hindu. I have, on the contrary, omitted this part and proposed 
that it should apply even to any child legitimate or illegitimate, one 
of whose parents was a person who was not a Muslim, Christian, 
Parsee or a Jew by religion. 

There is a proviso to the clause, May I humbly submit in regard to 
this proviso that it was probably introduced for some other purpose. If 
taken literally it would exclude those persons whom you do not want 
to exclude. It would exclude all the Punjabees. The wording of the 
proviso is very wide. If it is allowed to remain as it is, section 5 of 
the Punjab Succession Act will come into conflict. The proviso reads: 

“Provided that if it is proved that such person would not have 
been governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or usage as part 
of that law in respect of any of the matters dealt with herein if this 
Code had not been passed, then, this Code shall not apply to that 
person in respect of those matters.” 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


864 


864 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

It means that the Hindus of the Punjab will not be governed by 
this Code. 

An Hon. Member : What is the harm ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : The harm is this. I want the 
whole of the Punjab and India to come under the Code. There 
should be some uniformity in regard to our laws. I have given an 
amendment that so far as our customs are concerned they should 
be preserved. I have even suggested that the sections of the 
Code should be relaxed in such a manner that if our Provincial 
Assembly wants certain portions of the Code to be applied they 
should be applied. I have gone further and said that in regard to 
our customs, such as relating to succession, we should be allowed 
to own our law. At the same time I do not want to be cut off from 
the rest of India. In fact that is the basis of the Hindu Code. If I 
had heard the speech of Dr. Ambedkar, which he made moving for 
the consideration of the Bill, he said clearly that he wanted the 
whole of India to be governed by this Code and that such things 
as had crept into Hindu practices in their pristine glory should 
be repaired. If I remember his words he said that those damages 
should be repaired. I am one with him and I do not want that the 
whole of the Punjab should be taken away from the operation of 
the Hindu Code. I would rather like to be governed by the Code 
which applies to the whole of India rather than plough my own 
lonely furrow. Therefore I am anxious that this provision should 
either be taken away or amended in such a manner so that these 
persons may not be excluded. 

If my amendment is accepted sub-clauses (3) and (4) need not be 
there at all. According to me all those persons to whom the present law 
applies do come under these five categories which I have mentioned 
in my amendment. My amendment really seeks to attain the very 
same object which the Mover of the Bill has in his view. Only the 
wording is different. But I agree with him that so far as the scope 
of the Bill is concerned it should be extended to all those persons to 
whom the Hindu Law at present applies and only Muslims, Christians 
and Jews should be excluded. It is not that I want their exclusion 
for any purpose but for the purpose that those people themselves 
would not like to be governed by the Code. If they think that they 
would like to be bound by the Code let them pass a resolution or 
make a proposal to that effect. I want that the Hindu Code should 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


865 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 865 

be the real basis of the Civil Code. I do not want that such principles 
should be introduced in the Code which will not accord with the 
principles of the future Civil Code. 

In regard to adoption I submitted then and I submit now too that 
the customary adoption in the Punjab is based on the Civil Code. It 
does not have any real significance. 

Mr. Chairman : Would the hon. member like to continue his speech 
after lunch or finish now in another five minutes ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I would like to continue after 
lunch. 

The House then adjourned for Lunch till half -Past Two of the Clock. 


The house re-assembled after Lunch at half-Past Two of the Clock 
[Mr. Deputy-Speaker in the Chair ] 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Sir, when we adjourned I was 
speaking on the provisions of adoption contained in this Code. I was 
submitting that in view of the fact that many Members of the House 
desired it there should be a Civil Code instead of a Hindu Code, I 
was submitting that certain provisions relating to adoption under 
the Hindu Law have been modified by custom. The present position 
is that this old system of adoption has to a very great extent been 
modified and now many notions of a character, not strictly religious, 
have crept into the very idea of adoption. The old idea that by adoption 
an adopted person becomes the son of a person adopting, has to an 
extent faded away. In the Punjab, so far as adoption is concerned, 
according to custom any person can be adopted without any ceremonies. 
It is in the nature of the old Roman nominees system that an heir 
is appointed in the Punjab for carrying on the name of the family so 
that a person older than oneself can be appointed an heir and so such 
ceremonies are required as are required under the Hindu system of 
adoption. Moreover, even the incidents of that relationship are a bit 
different from the incidents which we find in regard to the system of 
adoption under the Hindu Law. 

Shri Tyagi : In the Punjab your son can be elder to you in age ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : In fact, the question which my 
friend is asking is really not germane. As a matter of fact, when I 
gave the conditions under which a person could be appointed an heir, 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


866 


866 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

an heir is appointed — a son is not created by the Act of appointment of 
an heir. That is the difference. Under adoption the adopted son carries 
on the name of the family, perpetuates the name of the father and 
that is the way in which the family continues. In Punjab the family 
continues in another way. An heir is appointed and he carries on the 
name of the family, so that it is not true to say that in the Punjab 
the customary appointment or adoption of an heir is tantament to 
creation of a son. Whether that is not there, under the Hindu Law the 
underlying idea was that a son was created by adoption, so much so 
there was a rule in the Hindu Law that the son of a lady who could 
not be married to the father could not be adopted and therefore there 
was some sort of ban against a daughter’s son so far as adoption was 
concerned. 

Now, under the provision of the Hindu Code it is necessary that 
for adpotion a man should not be married, that he must be less than 
fifteen years of age. These incident will not find favour in the Punjab, 
this provision will be too much to tamper with the custom of the 
Punjab which does not contemplate any restriction as regards age or 
ceremonies or other restrictions which are irksome. 

Shri Tyagi : Because the son is a man to the father in the Punjab. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : The child is the father of man 
in the whole world. So even now in the Punjab there is the custom of 
appointment of an heir which is akin to adoption. My subcription is 
that Dr. Ambedkar has been kind enough to those systems of law which 
have been prevalent in the South, for instance, the marumakkathayam. 
Arrange the Code in such a way that there is no violent conflict for 
those who follow different customary laws in the matter of marriage, 
adoption etc. and see that their systems are allowed to continue. This 
Code goes to the root of the Hindu Law in certain matters. So far as 
they are wholesome we are prepared to accept them but in so far as 
there are violent changes which conflict with the notions of the people, 
I would very humbly submit to Dr. Ambedkar that where he considers 
the provisions of the Code at a later date he will be indulgent enough 
to see that there will be to violent conduct. I know when he introduced 
this Bill he was pleased to say that he would try to see his way to 
accommodate and would be prepared to accept certain amendments 
which partake of the character I have narrated above. 

In regard to two matters — the question of adoption and the question 
of inheritance of married women — I must submit there will be such a 
violent conflict with the notions of the Punjabis in these two matters 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


867 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 867 

that they will not be prepared to accept the provisions of the Hindu 
Code. Even if it is forced down their throats, I submit there will be 
such a revolution in the society — I said on the last occasion that there 
will be revolt; there will not be revolt because we are too strong. 
There will be revolt in our minds and we will certainly not accept 
a custom to be forced down our throats that we cannot digest. One 
effect of such a step will be that when the father dies, since you 
are giving the father the power to make his will in any manner be 
pleases, the result will be that there will be forced wills by virtue 
of which the daughter will be disinherited. I am not against the 
inheritance of the daughter as such. Where you can have it, where it 
is in consonance with the ideas of the people, have it by all means. 
There is nothing objectionable in it. But the only point is that it 
is not expedient to have it in some places where it is not wanted. 
In the Punjab the daughters do not enjoy such a position that you 
can say that they do not get anything. I know that in Madras and 
other places the daughters are not treated so favourably, perhaps, 
as in the Punjab. In the Punjab at the time of marriage so much is 
given to the daughter in dowry. If you go to any wedding function 
in the Punjab — to the rich man’s place — you will find the dowry 
consists of thousands of rupees. So far as self-acquired property of 
the father is concerned, since the last 50 years our High Courts have 
made a change. Before 1909 the daughter did not even get a share 
in the self-acquired property of her parents. Now if there is no son, 
the daughter succeeds to the self-acquired property among all the 
people. But I do regard that this is not sufficient justice with the 
women of our country. I want that so far as the unmarried girls 
are concerned they may get as good a share as the son does — I do 
not want to give her just a half. So far as the married daughter is 
concerned I want that she should be entitled to inheritance, along 
with her husband, to her father-in-law’s property. That is to say, as 
soon as a marriage is performed, the husband and wife must unite 
their properties also and you can frame rules by virtue of which a 
married lady gets full rights of property. 

I do not want that the ladies of this country should not get full 
rights, but I do not understand why a lady should get a right in her 
father-in-law’s property as well as in her father’s property. To that 
I object. I want that our notions of society and family should not 
be rudely shaken. At present, the son is the pivot of the family. He 
continues the family. The woman goes to another family and becomes 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


868 


868 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the nucleus of that family. Let this contiune. Unless and until our 
whole notion of society changes, my humble submission is that we 
should not change it abruptly, because this change will be great 
that ultimately the ladies will lose on both sides. At the time of 
marriage, the sons will say, “Why give her so much dowry ? She is 
going to get inheritance”. At the time of the inheritance, the father 
will fall on the lap of the sons and they will get some deed or will 
by which the daughter will be deprived. Both ways, the woman 
will get nothing. This will not be a fair way of treating women. 

When you ask us, the people to whom this Bill will apply, I 
would certainly submit that if you want to have this Code in such 
a manner that you do not respect our wishes and our customs 
which have been in existence for the last several centuries, if you 
want to create such a conflict, then ultimately we shall have to 
say, “ You kindly leave us to our own fate”. This is my humble 
submission. Though I am in favour of the good provisions of this 
Bill, I would very humbly request Dr. Ambedkar and those others 
who are very much in favour of it to kindly see that our wishes in 
this matter are respected and we are allowed to have such customs 
or such provisions of the law as the majority of the people in our 
particular province want. This is, in essence, what we have given 
an amendment about in regard to Part I of the Bill. 

Shri Tyagi : How will the majority view be obtained ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : In the Punjab, the majority 
view is clear. You go to any village or town and ask any person 
who will be affected by the Bill; he will tell you exactly what I 
am submitting today. There is absolutely no difference of opinion, 
so far as Punjab is concerned. Therefore, my humble submission 
is that while you apply this law to Punjab — and I wish this law 
to be applied to Punjab — you apply it with these reservations. 
This law is not bad, it is entirely wrong to suggest that there is 
anything inherently wrong about it. There is nothing wrong about 
it. We have lived for so many centuries and we must repair the 
damage done to our nation. Therefore. I am entirely in support of 
this Bill, but if the notions and customs which are widely prevalent 
among the people and which are very delicate are upset, there 
will be such a great amount of litigation in the Hindu society. 
Every family in Punjab will be affected. There will be nothing but 
litigation. You are, in deference to public opinion bringing in a 
provision of the Partition Act. What will be the result ? On every 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


869 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 869 

death, the question will be : “ Let us see how we evaluate the property 
of the father”. The property will be evaluated and the sons will not 
have sufficient funds to buy off the daughter’s share and trouble will 
ensue. I am speaking from my experience as a lawyer for more than 
forty years. 

Pandit Krishna Chandra Sharma : You have been working in 
the criminal courts. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Hon. Members will address the Chair. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I for one have very great regard 
for my friend, who is also a criminal lawyer. All the same, my notions 
of a criminal lawyer are quite different from his. I have been practising 
on the criminal side as well as the civil side, but I take pride in the 
fact that I am a criminal lawyer. At the same time, I do not go about 
with my eyes shut. If a criminal lawyer is true to the description which 
my friend has in mind, he should know what is passing on in society. 
As a criminal lawyer, my friend should know what is passing on in 
and around Meerut, and when I am speaking about Meerut — I do not 
know what my friend’s personal notions are — I know the conditions 
in Meerut and I know also that they are not very different from the 
conditions in Hissar and Rohtak. Therefore, when I speak for Punjab, 
I also speak for my Friend and Meerut side, because in olden times 
Meerut was a part of this side of the Punjab. 

Pandit Krishna Chandra Sharma : For my friend’s information, 
I may say that Hissar is famous for bulls while Meerut is famous for 
cows. 

Shri Tyagi : May I know what have bulls and cows to do with the 
Hindu Code ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Hindu Code relates to marriage, you see. 

Shri Raj Bahadur : May I know whether cock and bull story is 
permitted in the House ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Order please. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : When you refer to the question 
of marriage, I must submit that the introduction of the principles of 
civil marriage in this Hindu Code is another point which must be 
considered specially by this House. If this is a Hindu Code, why bring 
in the civil marriage ? I want that the provisions in regard to marriage 
may remain as they are. There is no use repeating them here. If you 
want to make a Hindu Code which will not apply to other people 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 870 

870 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

like Musalmans etc. then do not bring in civil marriage here. If any 
Hindu wants to marry in that manner, he will marry according to 
the civil contract to which the Muslims, Christians and everybody 
has recourse. That is our joint Civil Code. Therefore, my humble 
opinion is that this affair of the civil marriage should not be 
included here. 

I do not want to refer to all the provisions of this Bill. I have 
spoken because I thought that we should at this stage define our 
attitude and tell Dr. Ambedkar what we feel about this Bill and 
what is perhaps the general feeling in the country. This Bill is 
not bad, and since we have decided that we should proceed with 
it, we may pass such provisions of the Bill as are good. In regard 
to those provisions. I do not want to stand in the way or adopt an 
attitude which smacks of dilatory tactics or which shows that we 
do not want the Bill to be passed. I want to make this point clear 
because it may be in the minds of many people that those persons 
who make long speeches do not, as a matter of fact, want this Bill 
to be passed. That is entirely wrong. So far as I am concerned. I 
want the Bill to be passed but I want those who are very much in 
favour of it to kindly see that such provisions are not passed as are 
in very great conflict with the notions and customs of the people. 

*Sardar Hukam Singh (Punjab) : Sir, I sympathise with the 
attitude of my hon. Friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava. What I 
understood him to say was that he wishes the Code to be passed 
but he does not wish that it should apply to him and the other 
people in his part of the country, Really, I have the same thing 
to say. I also wish that the Bill be passed, but that it should not 
be applied to me. I wish I could have made a similar motion and 
it should not have smacked of a particular community but what 
I found was that the application of the Code was not to certain 
territories but to certain communities. Therefore, I thought it fit 
to move this amendment that it should not apply to the Sikhs. 

Sir, I am not one of those who wish the society to stagnate. I 
believe in progress and I want to move with the times. I can claim 
that the Sikhs are a progressive section of the society. But why I 
do submit to the House that the Sikhs should be excluded from the 
application of this Code is because it contains certain provisions 
which are offensive to the customs and usages that we have been 
following for so many centuries. 


P.D. Vol. VIII, Part II, 6th February 1951, pp. 2452-62. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


871 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 871 

Panditji made a reference to the proviso to sub-clause (2) of Clause 2 
which reads : 

“Provided that if it is proved that such person would not have been 
governed by the Hindu law or by any custom or usage as part of that 
law in respect of any of the matters dealt with herein if this Code had 
not been passed, then, this Code shall not apply to that person in respect 
of those matters.”. 

What I understood him to say was that perhaps this might save the 
custom and usage prevalent in the Punjab. But I differ from him, because 
sub-clause (2) reads: 

“This Code also applies to any other person, who is not a Muslim, 
Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion;” 

and read with this sub-clause, the proviso does not refer to the custom 
or usage of the Hindus or Sikhs. Therefore, in my humble opinion this 
would not save the custom or usage and I, therefore, do not entertain 
his hope. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I never said that this proviso would 
save our customs or usage. What I meant was that if it is proved that 
we are not governed by the Hindu Law — the words are, “ provided that 
if it is proved that such person would not have been governed by the 
Hindu Law” — Punjabis would not be covered by this proviso. But our 
customs and usage will not be saved. It applies to all the Hindus. What 
I meant was that, as a matter of fact, our customs and usage should 
be saved by another provision which should say that we are allowed to 
be governed by our own customs, etc. But this proviso will introduce a 
certain amount of uncertainty. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : Sub-clause (1) of Clause 2 definitely lays 
down that the Code will apply to Hindus, Buddhists, Jains, Sikhs and 
also converts to Hinduism. 

Therefore, so far as I am concerned, there is no ambiguity at all. Be 
that as it may Panditji no doubt agrees with me to this extent that our 
custom and usage would not be saved at any rate. 

Sir, if a uniform Code had been attempted for all the citizens of 
India, then perhaps I would not have stood up and raised this objection, 
even if I had been called upon as a Punjabee to make some sacrifices. 
I would have made sacrifices in the hope that if we can grow up as 
a united nation, as one people, certainly some sections will have to 
make some sacrifices. But that is not the object here. No attempt is 
being made to weld all people into one nation by this Code. There 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


872 


872 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is discrimination between one community and another. Therefore, I 
think I am perfectly justified in opposing it. 

I should however make it clear here that so far as some Chapters 
of this Bill are concerned, I am in complete agreement with them. I 
am only opposed to three portions of it. If different parts had been put 
before the House separately, certainly I believe that most of it would 
have been passed without any controversy. But as it stands we have 
to take them as a whole and, therefore, I stand up to oppose them, 
because I cannot permit them to be passed without my voice being 
heard. 

The provisions to which I am opposed are (1) those relating to 
marriage and its dissolution by divorce, (2) adoption and (3) inheritance. 
(An hon. Member: What is left then ?) Much remains even then. It has 
been said by Panditji that it applies to those persons who were already 
governed by Hindu Law. This is correct. But if we have consented to 
be governed by Hindu Law, that does not necessarily mean that we 
should be compelled to revolve round the wheel even though it goes 
into foreign spheres and borrows certain things from other religions 
and other laws simply because I have once been dragged into it. I 
should not be compelled to revolve round it, though it does not remain 
within its own sphere. 

Then again, Sir, there is a misconception. The Hindu Code Bill 
says that the Sikhs are governed by Hindu Law. Now section 5 of the 
Punjab Customary Law — which has already been quoted by my hon. 
friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava says: 

“ Custom in this province is the first rule of decision in all questions 
regarding succession, special property of females, betrothal, marriage, 
divorce, dowery, adoption, guardianship, minority, bastardy, family 
relations, wills, legacies, gifts, partitions, any religious usage or 
institution, or alluvion and diluvion.” 

Now I ask : When I am governed on all these subjects by customary 
law, where is the Hindu Law that governs me ? I find that there is 
one subject that is not put down as such, namely, maintenance with 
which this Hindu Code deals. It is not put down in the Customary 
law that I am governed by the usage on that subject also. 

I was submitting that I have three subjects on which I have certain 
,, m objections and the Sikhs do not wish that they should be 
forced to be governed by the Hindu Code that is being 
proposed here in respect of them. First I referred to marriage and the 
dissolution and divorce connected with it. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


873 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 873 

[Mr. Speaker in the Chair ] 

Sir, so far as the Sikhs are concerned they have a very simple form 
of marriage. We might call it sacramental or dharmic marriage. It is 
known as Anand marriage. It is a simple and secular form of marriage. 
The couple sit down in the presence of the Guru Granth Saheb, they 
take a vow that they will remain united for ever — so long as they are 
alive, of course — and prayers are offered. Of course I might be confronted 
with this that this would be covered, and that it is not touched by the 
Hindu Code. But there are some implications which I am afraid would 
really affect me. There are certain degrees of relationship which are 
prohibited from marrying each other and these are strictly observed in 
all civilised societies. But so far as our society is concerned the list is 
not very large. Marriage between cousins has often been allowed. There 
have been many instances of marrying father’s sister’s daughter or 
mother’s sister’s daughter and they have not been considered as within 
the prohibited degree. And I tell you that you are driving your society 
towards that direction. We are far ahead of you. You are coming to that 
way. Do not be surprised at that. Now that you are proposing to give a 
share to the girl you are sure to come that way. You will have to march 
towards that direction. 

An Hon. Member : What about Sikh Jats ? 

Sardar Hukam Singh : What I am submitting relates mostly to 
Sikh Jats. The custom that I am talking of prevails mostly in Jats and 
Jats observe that. Ninety per cent of the Sikhs are agriculturists and 
live in villages. 

I was asking now that you propose to pass this legislation, by which 
the daughter shall have a share. Here I might make my position clear 
and nobody need feel perturbed. I am for a share for the girl. I am not 
opposed to it. But when you proposed that, you will have to take the risk 
that this long list of prohibited degrees shall continue diminishing and 
shall contract as time passes. I suppose the present list is not as long 
as it used to be under the strict Hindu Law. And it is sure to contract 
as time passes. 

Shri Tyagi : It will come nearer home. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : Surely. You cannot keep the two things 
apart. When you take this from the Muslim law you will have to permit 
cousins and other near relations to be outside the prohibited degrees. 
There is no doubt about it. Be prepared for it. You will have to march 
near it. You cannot keep away from it. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


874 


874 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Now that you are asking me to come in, that I should have this 
dharmic marriage, the implication would be that these prohibited degrees 
would be there. While there is freedom for me to marry such relations 
as I have described, this would create a ban on me. And it would not 
be only for the future. There have been so many such marriages and 
all of them would be invalid. Though you have provided in clause 21 
that I can get my marriage, my dharmic marriage, registered as civil 
marriage, but think of the instances and their number. We shall have 
to run to the courts or to the Registrar to get them validated. Do you 
want me, an old man, to get my marriage registered now ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Do you want to marry again ? 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : This Code would create a doubt because the 
girl that I might have married might, according to you, be within the 
prohibited degrees. What would happen then ? I enquire from the Hon. 
Minister what would happen to that marriage. 

Shri Tyagi : And to your children also. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : Yes, certainly. They will be “illegitimate” 
unless I get my marriage registered as a civil marriage now, at this age ! 
And the Hon. Minister wants all those persons now, at this advanced 
age, to run to the Registrar and get their marriages registered as civil 
marriages. 

Shri Tyagi : As he has done himself ! 

Sardar Hukam Singh : Then again there is a marriage that is usually 
known amongst the agriculturists of my part as karewa marriage or 
widow’s marriage. No distinction is made in the present Code as regards 
that. What will happen to that marriage, because we will have either 
the sacramental or dharmic marriage or the civil marriage — nothing 
beside it. The simple manner in which the karewa marriage is performed 
might look peculiar to some hon. Members here. There is no ceremony : 
it is a secular institution altogether. 

The man and the would be wife sit together, a chaddar is spread over 
them and sweets are distributed and they become husband and wife. I 
do not think, Sir, the Hon. Minister can point out to me any provision 
by which such marriages would be recognized. He is making this Code 
more cumbersome. . . . 

Pandit Thakurdas Bhargava : If it is a bigamous marriage then 
difficulty will arise. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


875 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 875 

Sardar Hukam Singh : May I enquire with your permission from 
my hon. Friend what form of marriage would that be. Would that be a 
Dharmic marriage without any ceremony. {Interruption) I do not agree 
with him and that would not be a dharmic marriage. Anyhow, I do not 
want to enter into a controversy here. 

I come to my next point, that is, adoption. What I am going to say 
might look somewhat surprising to some of my hon. Friends and in 
this respect also I claim that we are much in advance of the rest of the 
country, so far as this adoption is concerned. 

Dr. Ambedkar : You are always in advance of everybody. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : I will tell you just now and then you would 
agree with me that we are much in advance on that subject too. As 
has been just pointed by my hon. Friend, Pandit Thakurdas Bhargava, 
it is the customary appointment of a heir. It has nothing to do with 
religion. There is no horror of incest. We are not eager to create sons 
to offer us pindas. 

Shri Hussain Iman (Bihar) : Are there Pindas ? 

Mr. Speaker : Let him proceed further. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : We do want that we might have a heir to 
succeed to the property. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Why do not you allow the property to go to the State ? 

Sardar Hukam Singh : Then it might go to the Hon. Minister and 
that we do not want to do. Therefore, this is a most secular institution. 
There are no restrictions as to the age, caste or any ceremonies. A simple 
declaration is there and perhaps it was observed, last time too I made a 
remark that a man can adopt another older than himself. The adopter 
might adopt a man of his father’s age. There is no harm in that ; he 
might be married and he might have several children. This institution 
you would not find anywhere. I fail to understand, Sir, if all these usages 
and customs are effaced, what is going to happen to these institutions, 
to these customs that we love very much, these traditions to which we 
have been accustomed for so many centuries. 

Then, Sir, I would cite another peculiar instance, which might interest 
some of my hon. Friends and I invite the attention of the Hon. Minister 
particularly to this point. 

Mr. Speaker : The hon. Member may proceed with his speech. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : I wanted the Hon. Minister to pay attention 
to a subject which is very interesting. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


876 


876 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have been asked to introduce the Gandharva 
marriage. It was that which I was discussing. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : I have no objection if our Chief Whip 
wants it. Then, Sir, I was submitting another interesting thing 
about adoption which the other parts of the country perhaps do 
not know altogether. I know of instances where girls have been 
adopted. They have been made heir to the property and they have 
succeeded. Custom has allowed them and recognized them. I humbly 
request you Sir, to say whether with the introduction of this Code, 
all these traditions, all these customs and usages are going to be 
thrown away to the winds. Is the society that has been built going 
to chaos now ? I believe that the laws should reflect the stage of 
advancement of society, the progress that it has made, not that 
a target be fixed and then the society be pulled up to reach that 
target. It was tried in Turkey but it failed there also. I request 
this Government to go slow. There must be cases on the extremes 
on both sides and I believe there are hardships now in certain 
cases, but you cannot avoid this. There would be such cases even 
if this Code is passed. I again stress that ‘adoption’ is a very old 
institution which is so dear to us and we cannot afford to lose it 
even though this Code may be passed. 

Then the third thing to which we have serious objection is about 
inheritance. As I observed a few minutes ago I am not opposed to 
give a share to the girls. I rather believe that this discrimination is 
only on account of the sex, that she should not get an equal share. 
It was remarked that it is not only on sex, but I think it is only 
on sex that she is not being given an equal share with her brother. 
Otherwise, there is no reason if they are off-springs of the same 
parents. I ask, why she should not have an equal share. I say on 
that ground alone, she must have an equal share. My objection is 
not on that account. What I submitted last time as well — perhaps 
it was on the 14th December 1949 — that I would prefer that she 
should have an equal share in her parent’s property so long as 
she is unmarried and she should have an equal share with her 
husband as soon as she is married, in her father-in-law’s property. 
She must have a share. This should not disturb the present society 
and structure. We have pecular circumstances. I believe this Code 
would not apply to lands but certain 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


877 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 877 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava (Ajmer) : It will now. The official 
amendment is there. 

Sardar Hukam Sing : Sir, Punjab is a State of small holdings. 
Already they are uneconomic. Another thing is that we have smaller 
number of females than males in the Punjab. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Therefore, their value is great. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : Yes, Sir; you are going to increase their 
value but not to look to other things. That value can be, I should say, 
adjusted. As I said the number is already fewer. It is well-known that 
some time back people did not like that they should have sons-in-law 
and there were female infanticides. I tell you honestly and not as an 
argument that you would encourage that again, if you give a share, 
because that land-holder feels that he has already got an uneconomic 
holding, a pair of bullocks and a cow. It is not possible for him to part 
with those animals which are so essential for his cultivation. It is no 
answer to say that if a father had another son, how could he have 
dealt with him, he must have got a share. We are insisting that there 
should be a definite list of prohibited degrees, and we want to give 
the daughter in marriage outside that list. That is to say, a stranger 
would be brought in. He would not live there; he cannot associate 
himself with the environments. What he would do is to part with his 
share as soon as he marries the daughter. There are dissensions in 
every village; there are parties in every village. The friends would 
not buy the property; but the share would be sold to the enemy. This 
would create quarrels, murders and affrays. 

Shri Tyagi : He is right. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : I pray, kindly, do not bring this into the 
Punjab. Otherwise, you would create confusion and disorder there. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar) : What fault have the other 
provinces done ? Why not plead for them also ? 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order; let us proceed. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : I thought that if I advocated their cause, 
somebody might question my authority and representative character. 
Therefore, I confine myself to my own province, and particularly my 
own community. Otherwise, just as I said at the beginning, I wanted 
that I should represent the whole of my province; I feared that I 
might be questioned. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


878 


878 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I was submitting that that would create confusion and disorder and 
the whole society would be upset. That is not what is intended by this 
Code. That would not be progress; that would not be advancement, but 
would be rather a retrograde step. Therefore, so far as we are concerned, 
do not pull us back. Let us go on. You should consider us to be in the 
vanguard and follow us as we go further. That would be better perhaps 
for us, for the whole country and for all concerned. 

There is another thing that I wanted to submit. 

Shrimati Durgabai (Madras) : Sir, may I ask a question ? 

Mr. Speaker : It would be better that the hon. Member is allowed 
to go on without these arguments and counter arguments, if we really 
want to progress with the matter. All that I would earnestly appeal to all 
the Members is to be very attentive to the arguments advanced instead 
of putting questions at each stage. It is better that hon. Members hear 
all what a gentleman has to say and then advance their arguments. I 
am going to give full chance to all people who want to speak. 

Shrimati Durgabai : I am just asking a question, Sir,.... 

Mr. Speaker : Whatever that may be, let us allow the members to 
have their say. Otherwise, there are these interferences, these attempts 
to draw replies — I am noticing it, there are constant interferences 
notwithstanding my appeals not to interrupt — with the result that not 
only is the link of the speaker’s argument broken, but more time is 
taken, and I do feel that even the seriousness of the debate is being 
lost. We are here legislating on very vital matters. Let us, therefore, 
seriously and anxiously hear whatever every member has to say, instead 
of passing remarks or putting questions, just by way of explanation or 
drawing explanation on particular words. Let us be patient with the 
speaker. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : Then, Sir, I come to my last point, and that 
is rather painful. I want to bring it to the notice of the House that the 
Sikhs have already certain apprehensions; some might say that they 
are unfounded. Whatever it may be, we have this apprehension that 
there is an attempt to absorb the Sikhs and efface their traditions and 
culture. . . . 

Several, Hon. Members : No. no 

Sardar Hukam Singh : . . .usage and custom. They have certain 
grounds. They have always complained that they have not been fairly 
treated. One instance that they have cited is that while it was being 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 879 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 879 

announced that they are an integral part of the Hindus, when 
the President had to make an order about Scheduled Castes they 
were kept at a respectable distance. Under a recent Order of the 
President 34 castes have been declared as Scheduled castes provided 
they profess the Hindu religion. Only four castes, and that at the 
expense of all the safeguards that we wanted were allowed to be 
classed as Scheduled castes if they profess the Hindu or the Sikh 
religion. We have that complaint that whenever there is a chance to 
confer some benefit, then, we are not included or brought near and 
we are kept at a distance. But when there is nothing to be given, 
but only these usages and customs and traditions are to be effaced, 
we are offered an embrace, an empty embrace that might, rather, 
I should say, not be pleasant to us, because we love these customs 
and these traditions. We have adhered to them for a very long time. 
Therefore, I pray in all earnestness that we might be excluded from 
the sphere of this Bill. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : With your permission, Sir, 
I want to put a question, in respect of the last point of my hon. 
Friend. Is it not a fact that the Sikhs themselves came to Sardar 
Patel and agreed that only these four castes should be included 
among the Scheduled Castes and no others ? If that is true, if that 
is according to agreement, my hon. Friend is not entitled to raise 
this grievance here. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : It is a long subject. The Revered Sardar 
himself put in these words that these four castes could only be 
acknowledged, if the Sikhs gave up all the safeguards that they 
wanted. It was at the sacrifice of those things that these four castes 
were acknowledged, and they too only in two provinces, the Punjab 
and the PEPSU. They are not Scheduled Castes in other provinces. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : That is according to the 
agreement. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : No. 

Mr. Speaker : Dr. Ambedkar. 

Shri T. N. Singh (Uttar Pradesh) : Is Hon. Minister’s speech 
going to be in reply ? 

Several Hon. Members : No, no. 

*Dr. Ambedkar : Sir, I propose first to deal with my own 
amendment before I deal with the other amendments that have been 
tabled to this clause. 


P.D., Vol. VIII, Part II, 6th February 1951, pp. 2462-73. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


880 


880 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

It will be seen that in the amendment which I have moved there 
are three specific points. The first point is that I propose to omit 
the word professing which occurs in sub-clause (1). The reason for 
omitting this word is that it has been felt that probably today as 
the Hindu society is composed, there are people who are Hindus, 
but who do not profess the Hindu religion in the theological sense in 
which the word ‘profess’ is used. In former times one could give the 
illustration of the Brahmo Samajists in Calcutta or the Prarthana 
Samajists in Bombay, two sects which were formed from out of the 
Hindu community, which openly declared that they did not profess the 
Hindu religion. As my friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava observed 
in the course of his speech there are many Hindus to-day who, so 
far as religion is concerned, prefer to adopt an eclectic attitude. They 
like to have something from some religion which appeals to them, 
and to that extent they are prepared to abandon the religion of their 
ancestors. If, therefore, the word “profess”, remained in this context, 
it would be open for anybody to argue that unless it was proved that 
a particular individual was a professing Hindu this Code would not 
apply to him. That certainly is not the intention of the Code. The 
intention of the Code is that it should apply to every person who 
belongs to the Hindu faith. I prefer the use of that terminology and 
it is therefore, to do away with any such ground for an objection 
founded upon the word “profession” that I propose to delete it. 

My second amendment relates to clause (d). Clause (d) as it stands, 
says that this Code shall apply to a convert to the Hindu religion. 
Now, as the house knows, we are using the words “Hindu religion” 
in a very broad sense; not in the limited sense in which it would 
apply to a person who believed in the Vedas, who believed in the 
infallibility of the Vedas, who believed probably in the Chaturavarnas, 
and who also believed in the performance and the sanctity of the 
yagnas as a means of salvation. We are using the word in a large 
sense, to include also Buddhists, Jains, Sikhs etc. who do not believe 
in these dogmas. Consequently, if clause (d) remained that the convert 
who is referred to in sub-clause (d) is the convert only to the Hindu 
religion in the limited sense of the word. In order to do away with 
that contention. I propose to use the new phraseelogy — “convert to 
the Hindu religion, Buddhist ” and so on and so forth. 

My third amendment deals with the deletion of sub-clause (4). As 
the House will realise, this sub-clause (4) did not exist in the original 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


881 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 881 

Bill as it was placed before the House at the time of the first reading. 
This clause was introduced in the course of the proceedings of the 
Select Committee. The idea of those who sponsored sub-clause (4) 
was this. It was their view that since the intention of the Code was 
to bring all Hindus under all denominations under the purview of 
this Code, there was no purpose in setting apart those Hindus who 
had already performed their marriages under the Special Marriage 
Act of 1872. It was for that reason to make the Bill all inclusive, 
that this sub-clause (4) was brought in. I have however found that 
there is one point which was, I am sure, not present to the mind of 
the Select Committee when they introduced this clause. It is quite 
obvious that if sub-clause (4) remained and it applied to persons who 
were married under the Special Marriage Act of 1872, they would, in 
the matter of succession and inheritance be governed by the present 
provisions contained in this particular Code. Now, anyone who is 
aware of the provisions contained in the Succession Act with regard 
to inheritance and the provisions contained in this Bill will have 
no doubt that so far as women are concerned, the provisions of the 
Succession Act are far more liberal than the provisions contained 
in the present Code. It does not, therefore, seem right that people 
who have already married under a particular law and have on that 
account, become entitled to the more liberal provisions contained 
in the Succession Act should be dragged down and brought under 
the present Code which as I said, contains provisions relating to 
inheritance which are somewhat illiberal as compared with the other 
provisions. It is for that reason that I propose that sub-clause (4) 
should be omitted. 

Now, Sir, I will turn to the points made by the critics of clause (2). 
Examining the amendments that have been tabled, I do not find 
any difference between myself and my friend Pandit Thakur Das 
Bhargava. His amendments is, more or less, the same as those 
contained in clause 2. I will presently explain why I have in my 
draft, named certain communities which he thinks is unnecessary. 
With regard to the other amendments, one can see that there are 
really three points which the amendments seek to make. One is 
this that there is no necessity for a Hindu Code at all. What is 
necessary is a Civil Code applicable to all citizens. That is one 
point, of view which is adumbrated in the amendments. The 
second is that this very Code which is placed before the House 
and which, according to its terms, is intended to be confined to the 
Hindu community should be made applicable to non-Hindus, such 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


882 


882 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

as Muslims, Parsis, Jews, Christians and so on. That is to say, it should 
itself be regarded as a Civil Code, and the third suggestion is that the 
application of the Code should be voluntary. It should be a matter of 
choice either for any particular citizen or any particular member of 
the Hindu society to go before a magistrate and to register his will 
that he would like to be governed by this particular Code. In no other 
circumstances should this Code be made applicable in this country. 
And I believe there is one suggestion — I forget now the author of that 
suggestion — that this Bill should not come into operation except on 
a referendum to be taken after the elections or something like that. 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava : That comes up later. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Somebody said that, I cannot recall who. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : He intends to say so later on. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Now, I must say that I am very very much surprised to see some 
of those who until yesterday were the greatest opponents of this Code 
and the greatest champions of the archaic Hindu Law as it exists to 
day should come forward and say that they are now prepared for an 
All-India Civil Code. There is a proverb that a leopard does not change 
its spots and I cannot believe that those leopards which have been 
pouncing upon this Bill every time I came before this House have 
now suddenly so reformed their mentality as to become revolutionary 
enough to accept a new Code altogether. If they want a Civil Code, do 
they think that it will take very long to have a Civil Code ? Probably 
the underlying motive why they have made this suggestion is this. 
As it has taken four or five years to draft the Hindu Code they will 
probably take ten years to draft a Civil Code. I would like to tell them 
that the Civil Code is there. If they want it it can be placed before 
the House within two days. If they are ready and willing to swallow 
it, we can pass it in this House in half an hour. 

What is the Civil Code ? — let me ask. The Indian Succession Act 
is a Civil Code. Unfortunately it does not apply to Hindus. I do not 
know if there is any person with the greatest amount of legal ingenuity 
who can devise a better Civil Code than the Indian Succession Act. 
All that would be necessary to make the Indian Succession Act 
universal and civil, that is to say, applicable to all citizens, would 
be to add a clause that the words contained in clause 2 of the Act, 
namely that it shall not apply to Hindus, be deleted and then you 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


883 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 883 

can have a Civil Code tomorrow. If you want the marriage law as 
part of your Civil Code there again the text is ready. The Special 
Marriage Act is there. All that you have to do is to remove the words 
that it shall not apply to this or that it shall only apply to that. All 
that you have to say in clause 2 is that it shall apply to all citizens 
and there is an end of the matter. I want to know whether those 
who have made this suggestion have done it with a serious intention 
and pious purpose of really having a good law on these matters. . . 

Shri Sondhi (Punjab) : Take them at their word. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am not prepared to do it, because I know 
them very well. That is the reason why yesterday I did not accept 
the suggestion of my friend Mr. Rohini Kumar Chaudhary. He 
said, “Adopt whatever measures and either take the Code through 
or if you cannot take it through, keep it to the end.” I could have 
accepted the word and the suggestion of my friend Mr. Rohini Kumar 
Chaudhary if I could believe and trust him or that he will not have 
any opposition if I adopted the course that he suggested. I now find 
that he has been completely isolated. Some of his friends who were 
walking with him and forming a solid front, I find have now fallen 
away. They have seen light and they are prepared to support the 
measure in some parts, if not on the whole. Therefore, this idea of 
having a Civil Code just does not appeal to me, because I do not 
think there is either much firmness behind it or, I was almost going 
to say, seriousness behind it. 

With regard to the plea that this Code should be applied to all 
citizens, I think my friend Pandit Thakur Dass Bhargava has replied 
to the critics who have made this suggestion and I do not think I 
can improve upon what he has said. I do not know that those who 
made this suggestion could be regarded as so ignorant — I was almost 
going to say so foolish — as not to realise the sentiments of different 
communities in this country ? It is all very good to say that we 
have proposed in our Constitution a Secular State. I have no idea 
whether any Members, when they use these words “Secular State” 
really mean what the Constitution is intended to mean. It does not 
mean that we can abolish religion : it does not mean that we shall 
not take into consideration the religious sentiments of the people. 
All that a secular State means is that this Parliament shall not be 
competent to impose any particular religion upon the rest of the 
people. That is the only limitation that the Constitution recognises. 
We are not here to fluot the sentiments of the people. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


884 


884 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : You are doing it. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am not doing it at all, as I will show you. 
Therefore, it seems to me that it is a suggestion which really lacks 
even commonsense and I do not therefore propose to deal with it. 

Now in regard to the other question that the Code should be made 
voluntarily applicable. I think this is a very dangerous suggestion. 
What does this suggestion mean ? It means that this Parliament is 
only a body to recommend a certain thing. All that the Parliament 
can do, if we accept the suggestion is to say to the people outside. 
“ This is a law we have passed. We think it is good. Gentlemen, it 
is for you to say whether you will accept it or not.” If that is the 
position that we are going to adopt and if we accept this principle 
now, we shall be setting a precedent and there will be no end to 
such recommendations that may be made by Parliament, namely that 
much of its legislation should be left to be passed by people outside 
on a referendum. I do want to say that this Parliment is a Sovereign 
Parliament. Beyond seeking the mandate of the people it has no 
obligation to the people to obtain their consent. It can decide what 
it likes. It is supreme : It has authority to make a law, to unmake 
a law. If every time this Parliament is to be subjected to the vote 
of the ignorant people outside who do not know the A.B.C. of the 
technicalities of the law, this Parliament will have to be suspended : 
it would be much better not to have a Parliament at all. 

Secondly, I have not seen any single example in the history of 
the Legislative Assembly of this country of such a course being 
recommended to Parliament. This is not the first time that Parliament 
is passing a law dealing with Hindu Law. I have made a modest 
computation of the laws passed by the Indian Legislature ever 
since legislative power began to be exercised, practically from 1833. 
Altogether 29 laws have been passed, some of them of a very drastic 
character making fundamental changes, but there never was any 
plea in this House that any of those laws should be left to be passed 
and sanctioned by public opinion or public referendum. {Art hort. 
Member : They were not elected legislatures). It is worse still. Even 
when the legislatures were not elected legislatures, they exercised 
the lawmaking power and imposed it upon the people. Now when 
the legislature is far more representative than it ever was a plea is 
made that this Parliament cannot make a law for the people. 

An Hon. Member : Nobody has said that. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


885 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 885 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is what some hon. Members suggested when 
they said there should be a referendum. 

Now, I will go back to some of the comments which were made on 
the draft of clause 2. These comments were made particularly by my 
friend, Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad, and my friend Pandit Thakur Das 
Bhargava. Yesterday you were not in the Chair, Sir, but . . . 

Prof. Ranga (Madras): But the Chair was there. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The Chair was there. What I wanted to say was 
that Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad started in a very accusing mood. He 
tried to prejudice the House against me by saying that the language 
of my amendments was mandatory : “ substitute this.” He thought 
that the more polite way of putting down amendments was to say, 
such-and-such words shall be substituted for such-and-such words”. 
Really speaking, I need not have taken this point seriously because 
drafting is not my business — drafting is the business of another 
body of people who have their set rules of drafting and I could have 
very easily said that I am not responsible for it. But I did make 
enquiry into the matter whether the draftsman in using the language 
which he has used bad really fallen from grace or from the usual 
standard. The facts are these. For instance, the formula suggested by 
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad that is, “such-and-such a word shall be 
substituted”, I found is generally used when you draft an Act. There 
seems to be a distinction between the language adopted in drafting 
an Act and the language to be adopted in drafting an amendment. 
Therefore, as the draftsman was drafting the amendments he did not 
use the usual formula which I said is used in drafting an Act. The 
second thing is this. As the House will remember, the President has 
issued certain orders under the Constitution which he is entitled to 
issue. In that series of orders — I think it is a very fat book which 
some of my hon. Friends must have seen — the language that is used 
is the language which the draftsman has used in these amendments. 
He says, “I have followed the precedent which has been adopted by 
the President, in making these amendments”. I went further and 
enquired, “Why did the President depart from the usual practice”? 
And the answer given was that the orders were so bulky that it was 
necessary to economise in printing paper and ink. Therefore, the 
draftsman who helped the President in framing his orders followed 
this particular way of putting these amendments. My draftsman, 
therefore, has really committed no error, no fault, in following the 
percedent adopted in the Constitutional orders. I, therefore, submit 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


886 


886 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

that my learned friend’s attempt to depict me in rather unsavoury 
colours has fallen to the ground. I will not deal with that further. 

Now, my friend’s objection was to sub-clause (d). He said that I 
am hoping in the convert to Hinduism. His point, if I understood it 
correctly, was that I have made no provision either here in clause 2 
or in any other part of this Bill to have the rights of the convert 
in the family in which he was born. I must say that my friend, 
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad who legitimately claims a very extensive 
knowledge of law should have forgotten that there is a very old 
Act called the Disabilities Removal Act of 1850 which was passed 
just for this very purpose namely, to remove any disability from a 
person who wants to change his religon in order to safeguard what 
is called liberty of conscience. It was an Act which was passed on 
the agitation of the missionaries in this country who found that the 
Hindu were not prepared to change their religion because under the 
ancient Hindu Law a man who went out of the Hindu fold was a 
pant — a patit could not inherit property. In order to do away with 
that rule of Hindu Law this particular Act was passed and I have 
done nothing to abrogate the provisions of the Act. If my friend 
had refered to the Schedule which deals with the Acts which are 
repealed by this Code he would have found that the Caste Disabilities 
Removal Act is not included in that Schedule. Therefore, the convert 
will retain all the rights of inheritance in his father’s family if he 
wants to change his religion. And therefore Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad’s 
complaint is absolutely groundless. 

My friend said he had an objection to sub-clause (2). Sub-clause 
(2) says — 

“ This Code also applies to any other person who is not a Muslim. 

Christian, Parsi or Jew by religion”. 

Obviously this sub-clause (2) is what I call a residuary clause, a 
clause which refers to the balance of people who are not included either 
among Hindus who are specifically mentioned or the Parsis, the Jews, 
the Christians, or the Muslims. There can be no doubt about it that 
there are in this country a vast number of people who do not follow 
any of these recognised religions, so to say. What are we going to do 
about it ? Certainly this Bill either should say that it does not apply 
to them or it should say that it does apply to them. And if it said 
that it does spply to them, it should say to what extent it applies to 
them. Everybody knows that there are in this country a vast number 
of people such as, for instance, the Adi Dravidas, the tribal people, 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


887 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 887 

the jungle tribes, the backward classes, the animists, and so on and 
so on — one can go on enumerating ad infinitum. What about them ? 
Surely some provision must be made for them. Sub-clause (2) therefore 
applies to this class of people whom I called a residuary class. Now, it 
might be said that in making this Bill the Government has a political 
motive, namely, to absorb these non-descript people into the Hindu 
community so to say, by a side door. That is not our purpose at all, 
4PM because you will see from the proviso what we are doing. 

The Hindu Code will apply to them only if it is proved 
that Hindu customs and Hindu usages are prevalent in that class; 
otherwise, they are free to do whatever they like. There, again, the 
criticism of my friend was quite misplaced. 

Prof. Ranga : Can they opt themselves out ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Once they have adopted the customs and so on, 
they are in; otherwise they are out. 

Now, Sir, I will deal with certain points that were raised by my 
friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava and by Sardar Hukam Singh. 
Sardar Hukam singh’s amendment is that it should not apply to the 
Sikhs. Later on, I suppose, he moderated his attitude and said that 
he had only objection to some parts. With regard to the question 
whether this Bill should apply to persons or communities other than 
Hindus in the strict sense of the word, I think it is desirable to have 
some general idea about the matter. The first thing that I would like 
to emphasize and which I would like Members of Parliament to bear 
in mind is this, that from a sociological point of view the variety of 
religions that we have in India or elsewhere seems to me to fall into 
two categories. There are religions which have as their part a legal 
system, which you cannot sever from those religions. There are religions 
which have no legal system at all, which are just pure matters of 
creed. The peculiarity about the Hindu religion, as I understand it, 
is this, that it is the one religion which has got a legal framework 
integrally associated with it. Now, it is very necessary to bear this 
thing in mind, because if one has a proper understanding of this, it 
would not be difficult to understand why Sikhs are brought under the 
Hindu religion, why Buddhists are brought under the Hindu religion 
and why Jains are brought under the Hindu religion. When the Buddha 
differed from the Vedic Brahmins, his difference was limited to matters 
of creed. The Buddha did not propound a separate legal system for 
his own followers; he left the legal system as it was. It may be that 
the legal system that then prevailed was a good system; that it had 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


888 


888 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

no blemishes and no faults. So, he did not direct his attention to making 
any changes in the legal system in consequence of the changes that he 
introduced in certain religious notions. 

[Mr. Deputy- Speaker in the Chair.] 

In the same way, when Mahavir founded his own religion he did not 
create a new legal system for the Jains. He allowed the legal system 
to continue and I think Sardar Hukam Singh will correct me if I am 
wrong when I say that none of the ten Gurus ever created a law book 
as such for the Sikhs. The trouble is — you may call it trouble; you may 
call it good fortune; you may call it misfortune; I am not particular about 
words — the fact is this. In this country, although religions have changed, 
the law has remained one. That is why the Sikh follows the law. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : But now you are making a new law. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is a new thing now. The Jains come and ask, 
“What are you going to do to us ? Are you going to make us Hindus ?” 
The Sikhs say the same thing. The Buddhists say the same thing. My 
answer to that is this : I cannot help it. You have been following a single 
law system and it is too late now for anyone to say that he shall reject 
this legal system wholesale and will have nothing to do with it. That 
cannot be done. Therefore, the application of the Hindu Law and the 
Hindu Code to Buddhists, Jains and Sikhs is a historical development 
to which you and I cannot now give any answer. All that we can do is 
to say that the thing has gone wrong and change it, reform it or make 
it more equitable and this is what we are doing. So far as the Sikhs 
are concerned, I find from the judgments of the Privy Council that this 
question was debated much earlier than even 1830, when the decision 
was taken that the Sikhs were Hindus so far as law is concerned. Just 
count from 1830 to 1950 — for how many years you have been regarded 
as Hindus for legal purposes ! 

Sardar Hukam Singh: It has not been doubted. 

Dr. Ambedkar : In law, we have a principle which is called stare 
decisis — a decision taken a long time ago and on which people have gone 
had better be stayed although it is wrong. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : You are going to change it now. What should 
I do? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Now, Sir, with regard to the points made by my 
friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava. I was really very happy to hear 
his speech. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


889 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 889 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : No praise will bring him into your parlour. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have used no temptations. I now find that really 
he has been digging various trenches one after the other. He knows 
very well and I see from the last trench that he knows very well that 
he would not be able to defend the first trench or the second trench or 
the third trench. He has got a very small last trench which, of course, 
is concerned with ousting the married daughter and I think that if 
that point could be conceded his opposition would be extinguished 
completely. 

He has raised other questions also with regard to customary law. I 
agree and I have examined this position with great care. The Punjab 
Law does show that certain matters relating to personal law shall 
be decided by customary law, but I also know and I think my friend 
Thakur Das Bhargava also knows that the customary law is Hindu 
Law really. I do not think that that proposition can be denied, namely, 
that what is called customary law in Punjab is Hindu Law. The reason 
why it was not called Hindu Law was because the same customary 
law prevailed among the Muslims, and the East India Company was 
frightened about using the words “Hindu Law” when the law was 
also applicable to the Musalmans. But these are merely differences of 
words. It cannot be said that Punjab is not governed by Hindu Law : 
Punjab is governed by Hindu Law. 

Now his great point was that I was laying an axe on their customary 
laws in the province. Well, as I listened to some of the instances which 
both my friends Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava and Sardar Hukam Singh 
gave, I found that these customary laws were really not appealable 
in any sense. I would merely call their marriage laws marriage made 
easy, their divorce laws divorce made easy and their inheritance law 
inheritance made easy. There is nothing fundamentally different about 
it. Therefore, I am not going to discuss the question on this occasion, — 
what extent the customary law should be saved ; to what extent the 
Punjab should be excluded. But I want to make this statement that I 
should never agree to exempt any province from the operation of this 
law. Let there be no doubt about it at all that the Hindu Code shall 
be a uniform code throughout India. Either I will have that Bill in 
that form, or not have it at all. 

With regard to the second point as to saving customary law, I think 
that is a point that he could raise on the various clauses of the Bill 
where he wants to introduce the customary law, and if he proves 
that the deletion of the customary law is going to introduce any kind 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 890 

890 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of hardship I shall certainly consider the matter with great sympathy. I 
want to make this Hindu Code as easy as I can possibly make it. 

Shri Tyagi : As marriage in Punjab ! 

Dr. Ambedkar : Easy in the sense that I do not want any kind of 
hostility, or hostile camp against the Hindu Code standing out. 

If my hon. friend sees clause 4 he will find that it does not altogether 
oust custom. Therefore, when any particular clause comes up for 
consideration, if my hon. friend considers that the existing custom in 
the Punjab should be saved from the operation of that particular clause 
and if he can make out a case for exemption, I have no doubt that the 
matter will be sympathetically considered. I do not intend to give a 
more detailed reply to that because I think it is quite outside the scope 
of this particular clause. 

*Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : rose — 

Shri Raj Bahadur : May I know how many more members are there 
to speak on amendments. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I suggest that this clause be disposed of today. We 
have spent two days on it and there has been more than enough debate 
on it. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : Sir, I claim the credit of being isolated in 
the matter of this legislation. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : The hon. Member can come to the front 
bench and speak. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : Will you let me sit there tomorrow during 
the question hour ? 

I confess that in this House I am isolated. But I hope the Hon. the 
Law Minister will have the courtesy to admit — which is a fact — that he 
is completely isolated outside this House. I do not regret the position in 
which I am placed, because I find that hon. Members of this House are 
afraid of speaking out the truth of telling the hon. lady Members of this 
House what they ought to be told that they are proving themselves far 
too aggressive. This, I respectfully submit, is not a matter to be laughed 
over. Hon. Members of this House would have noticed the way in which 
my revered friend Babu Ramnarayan Singh was squeezed out of his seat 
yesterday. It is only on account of the relenting heart of a certain lady 
Member that my hon. Friend has found his way to his seat. 


P.D., Vol. VIII, Part II. 6th February 1951, pp. 2473-83. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


891 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 891 

Sir, I warn this House against this aggressive character of our women. 
I think it is time that we speak out. I want to ask the Hon. Minister for 
whom he is legislating this Hindu Code and who wanted him to push 
on and proceed with it against the wishes of a large section of Hindu 
Society. Is it not because the hon. Lady Members of this House have 
egged him on to do it ? 

I should, however, like to tell the Hon. Minister that he is not alone 
in that predicament. This House will recollect what our respected friend 
Acharya Kripalani said at the time we were considering the Report of the 
Select Committee, about the attitude adopted by one of his colleagues in 
this House and his companion in this world. He said that he was making 
bold to speak because his ‘colleague’ had gone abroad and when she 
returned she might ask for an account of the finances of the household, 
but also his conduct during her absence. 

That shows, Sir, where we stand today. It is on account of this that 
you are prepared to brush aside the sentiments of the less forward 
Hindu women, who do not know how to dress themselves properly. It 
is the women who do not have recourse to gaudy and gorgeous sarees, 
women who do not know how to paint themselves — it is that section of 
the Hindu women whom you are trying to suppress in the way you are 
doing today. 

An Hon. Member : Is all this in clause 2 ? 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : I want to make it perfectly clear that 
I oppose all the amendments, including that of my hon. Friend 
Dr. Ambedkar, except the one which has been put forward by my hon. Friend 
Mr. Jaspat Roy Kapoor. I support that amendment because it practically 
tantamounts to an opposition to the Hindu Code. I will explain how it 
is an opposition to the Hindu Code. It gives us the fullest discretion to 
make this Hindu Code a dead letter, because according to this amendment 
the Hindu Code will only govern those people who would come forward 
in the open and make a declaration and say that they want this Hindu 
Code to be applied to them. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : I am tempted to exclaim ‘ Save me from my 
supporters’! 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : I may tell my hon. Friend Mr. Kapoor 
that he may leave aside the kambli but the kambli would not leave 
him. To the end of this debate on the Hindu Code I shall follow him 
wherever he goes. If my hon. Friend Mr. Kapoor’s amendment is 
carried, it practically means that we shall be in the position that we 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


892 


892 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

are today, This Hindu Code will be more or less a Special Hindu 
Marriage Code. It will be something like that. Even now a Hindu 
can marry within a prohibited degree if he makes a declaration as 
is required under the Civil Marriages Act. Similarly, if this Hindu 
Code would only govern those who would make a declaration that 
they want to be governed by it, I believe that two-thirds — not two- 
thirds but nearly cent per cent — of the Hindus would refuse to 
come forward and make declaration in the manner which has been 
suggested by my Friend Mr. Kapoor. That will mean practically 
that this Code will be shelved and the Hindu Law which governs 
us today will continue to govern us. 

I was very much interested to bear about this Punjab Customary 
Laws Act. This Punjab Customary Laws Act, as was admitted by 
my hon. friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava who referred to it in 
this House, did not prohibit bigamy at all. What my hon. Friend 
Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava wants is that the Punjab should be 
absolutely left out of this Hindu Code, that this Hindu Code may 
be in force in the rest of India but not in the Punjab — which means 
that although bigamy may be an offence in India, it will not be 
an offence in the Punjab and my hon. friend may go on merrily 
as he likes. I do not understand this, and I hope my Hon. Friend 
Dr. Ambedkar will be able to explain the position to us. It is this. 
When custom has got the force of law and that custom becomes 
invariable, no legislation can really over-ride it. Ordinarily if you 
are going to prove a custom, the burden is on you to prove that the 
custom is invariable, that the custom is not immoral, and that the 
custom has been followed. But when that custom is embodied in a 
piece of legislation which has been in force for some time and when 
that custom has not been abrogated, has been recognized. I do not 
understand how the application of the provisions of this Code can 
in any way interfere with that customary law unless it is stated 
clearly that all that law has been repealed by this Code. I may 
not have thoroughly studied the Hindu Code, but my impression is 
that no such provision has been made in this Code to repeal the 
Customary Law Act of the Punjab. And if that stands unrepealed 
you shall have inconsistent legislation in this country. Hindus in 
the whole of India will be governed by the Hindu Code, but those 
in the province of Punjab, where customary laws have been codified 
and are in force, will remain unaffected by this Code. I will ask 
the hon. lady Members of this House whether they are prepared 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


893 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 893 

to allow Hindus of the Punjab to ‘commit’ bigamous marriages 
whether they are agreed at any rate that there shall be no divorce 
in the Punjab and that they would allow their sisters in the Punjab 
to be “persecuted” — it is their language, not mine. I say no woman 
can be persecuted. The days of persecution of the woman have gone. 
Nowadays it is the men who are being persecuted by the tyranny 
of women. If any hon. Member of this House had the temerity to 
express himself clearly, he would say something about the tyranny 
of modern women. 

Therefore, I would ask this House to consider and pause carefully 
before it gives its assessment to this piece of legislation. Hon. Members 
of this House will remember that the Members of this House had no 
mandate to support such a sweeping legislation, a legislation having 
such far-reaching effects. Our election had taken place in an indirect 
way. I repeat what my hon. friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmed said. It 
is not that we are not competent to pass this legislation. We are 
competent to pass any legislation today. We are competent to pass 
a legislation that the rule which is now obtaining — the salutary 
rule which has been accepted by the Government of India — that 
no married women should be taken in the Indian Foreign Service 
should be abrogated, and we can pass a legislation to say that none 
but women shall be taken therein. We are perfectly competent to do 
that. There is no question of incompetency here. Women can become 
constables and carry sticks ; they can put on pyjamas and turbans ; 
they can even wear beards ! also as Members of the Constabulary. 
Why can we not pass a legislation like this ? Nothing stands in the 
way of our doing this. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : How do all these arise under this ? 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : I was only giving an analogy. Then I come 
to the most important thing. As we had no opportunity of getting 
a mandate from our electorate and as we have been ignoring the 
majority opinion given or received as a result of circulation of this 
Bill, we must take very great care to consider how far this legislation 
will be accepted by us. I therefore agree with my hon. friend, 
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad that the consent of the people is necessary for 
passing this legislation. Now, speaking about discrimination, a great 
deal was said yesterday about the discriminatory character of this 
piece of legislation and about the way in which the Constitution has 
been ridden rough-shod. Dr. Ambedkar, if I remember a right, himself 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


894 


894 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

referred to the question of breach of certain fundamental rights of the 
Constitution. He said if the present Hindu law is not amended, in the 
manner in which he seeks to amend this code, then a question may arise 
in the Supreme Court or in the High Court where it will be asked by 
the other parties that the Hindu law makes a discrimination between 
Sudras and non-Sudras. A Sudra of any age can be adopted. A sudra 
can be adopted even though he may be related very closely and then 
a Brahmin of a similar position cannot be adopted. Therefore there is 
discrimination in the present Hindu law and therefore he said that 
unless the present Hindu Code is adopted the present Hindu law will 
always be subjected to criticism by a court of law on the ground that 
it is discriminatory. 

Now, Sir I come to a more serious point. I suggest that the arguments 
which have been put forth by me hon. friends. Messrs. Jhunjhunwala 
and Naziruddin Ahmad should also be taken into serious consideration. 
I also want to draw the attention of the House to one particular point, 
namely the discriminatory character of this legislation which hurts 
the Constitution itself. My hon. friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad and 
I are behaving as if we are sailing in the same boat. He is isolated 
in one bench here and I am isolated in another. My hon. friend, 
Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad — God forbid — if he were to take another wife, if 
he wants to marry again during the life-time of his present spouse, then 
he will not be liable to conviction either under the Indian Penal Code or 
under the Hindu Code, whereas I being a Member of the same House, 
being a close neighbour of his, if I dared to follow his example and if I 
have in undergo another ceremony of marriage, what will be my fate ? 
I shall be simply prosecuted, convicted, sentenced to imprisonment and 
probably man-handled when I am taken to prison by my own friends. 
There will be a great public feeling against you that I was spared in 
any way. Is this not discrimination ? If that is not discrimination, I fall 
to understand the meaning of the word ‘discrimination’. We are subjects 
of the same sovereign power; we are bound by the same Constitution ; 
we are living in the same realm and while the one enjoys the privilege 
of marrying as many as four times. I cannot dare to marry more than 
once. What is then the meaning of discrimination ? 

Shri Tyagi : Bad luck. 

Shri Raj Bahadur : On a point of information, may I know how 
many times has the hon. Member married already. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : That is a personal question. Examples 
are very contagious. My hon. friend Mr. Tyagi says that it was my 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


895 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 895 

bad luck that I have been put in such a discriminating position. Let 
us take it arithmetically ; if after having married once, I am called 
‘unlucky’ then what are you to call a gentleman who has not been able 
to marry so long. Yesterday my hon. friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad 
mentioned about a certain kind of help which some of my esteemed 
friends would give in the way of vote by quoting Hindu Shastras. He 
being a non-Hindu probably was feeling delicate and refrained from 
saying what he wanted to say. Let me make myself clear. I submit that 
the first premises on which those who want to support this Hindu Code 
is this : Hindu religion is intimately connected with Hindu law, that 
is to say the Hindu law is intimately connected with Hindu religion. 
Divorce of Hindu law from Hindu religion means nothing. Here this 
is a religious question. If the Hon. Minister in charge of the Home 
Ministry were to take out a census of those people who believe that 
not to have a son is to go to Hell, you will find that two thirds of the 
Hindus believe in that. They believe that if you do not have a son, 
you will go to hell. 

Shri Tyagi : I want to know how can one help it if he has not got 
a son. What is he to do ? It is not in his hands. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : You need not go into irrelevant questions. 
I would just like to tell my hon. friend that there is no limit of age so 
far as marriage is concerned. Dr. Ambedkar has been merciful in this 
respect. He has said do not marry more than once. You may divorce 
a dozen of your wives and there is no bar to your marrying again. 

Shri Tyagi : One by one. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : Only one at a time ; not more than one. 
That is what is stated here. He does not lay down any restrictions of 
age. A woman of 85 years under this new picture of the Hindu Code can 
marry a young man of 25. There is no civic sense in this Hindu Code. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta (Delhi) : What about vice versa ? 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : Vice versa also. I submit that it is most 
inhuman for the author of this Hindu Code to suggest that you can, 
whatever your age, marry again if you are inclined to marry. 

Shri Bharati L. Krishnaswami (Madras) : What is the relevance 
of this to clause 2 ? 

Shri Deputy Speaker : He says that the Hindu Code Bill ought 
not to be applied to all persons except to those who voluntarily submit 
themselves to the Code. Therefore, he is developing that argument. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


896 


896 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : Coming to the clause under discussion 
personally, I would prefer that the provision should remain 
unchanged, so far as professing the religion is concerned. My hon. 
friend Dr. Ambedkar and a few others have sought to amend the 
provision by saying that this Code shall apply to Hindus by religion. 
It is very difficult for anybody to prove that he is by religion a 
Hindu. What does the word ‘religion’ indicate. The word ‘religion’ 
is derived from religio, to bind. Can I say that I am a Hindu by 
religion ? I may say that I am born of Hindu parents, that I am a 
son of a Hindu and therefore I am a Hindu. It would be difficult 
to say that I am a Hindu by religion. The Hindu religion lays 
down a very high standard. Judged by those standards, it will be 
found that most of the people who call themselves Hindus are not 
really Hindus. I may profess myself to be a Hindu : I may like to 
be governed by the Hindu law or Hindu Code ; but I cannot call 
myself to be a Hindu by religion. I do not follow the principles of 
that religion at all. How can I say that I am a Hindu by religion ? 
A Hindu is not expected to take meat. According to the Hindu 
religion, it is a forbidden thing. There may be many in this house, 
who may be calling themselves Hindus, but who would not be a 
Hindu according to those standards. Many who may call themselves 
Hindus may be doing un-Hindu acts. But, still, they would like to 
be governed by the Hindu Code. To say that this Code shall only 
apply to those who follow the principles of the Hindu religion would 
be a misnomer and is certainly opposed to all principles of honesty. 
I say that although I may not be a Hindu, although I may not be 
a follower of the Hindu religion, I profess Hinduism ; I say that I 
am a Hindu. So long as I say that I am a Hindu, the Hindu Law 
or the Hindu Code may be applicable to me. So long as I do not 
renounce my religion, so long as I say that I am a Hindu, because 
I call myself a Hindu, I shall be governed by the Hindu Law. Or 
as my hon. friend Mr. Jaspat Roy Kapoor contemplates, so long as 
a man says that he will be governed by the Hindu Code, he shall 
be governed by the Hindu Code ; not otherwise. Therefore, I say, 
how can you lay down this condition that one must be a Hindu 
by religion ? 

In our part of the country, that is in Assam, the tribal people have 
been held to be governed by the Hindu Law. They are not Hindus. 
They are not Hindus by religion. They do not follow the principles 
laid down in Hinduism for marriage. They do not observe the same 
kind of the prohibitive degree of Hindu marriage. They do not follow 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


897 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 897 

the same rules of adoption. All the same they are governed by Hindu 
Law, because in some cases they have no other law, and in other cases 
they profess to be Hindus. Therefore, if it comes to a question between 
the phrases “professing the Hindu religion” and “Hindu by religion” I 
will prefer the former. 

And now, let me come to another aspect of the matter. There is this 
question of converts, and Dr. Ambedkar has himself brought forward 
an amendment in this respect. But I maintain that so far as Hinduism 
is concerned, this word “convert” is not applicable. I can understand 
reconversion to Hinduism, though I do not know much about it, there 
is no conversion to Hinduism because Hinduism is not a proselytising 
religion. To speak of a convert to Hinduism is absolutely meaningless. 
There cannot be any conversion to Hinduism. Anyone living in Hinduism 
is a Hindu, unless he clearly says that he is not a Hindu, that he is a 
Muslim, or a Parsi, or a Christian or Jew. That has been the position 
from time immemorial. There cannot be a convert to Hinduism. Will 
Dr. Ambedkar kindly tell me what are the ceremonies to be performed 
for a conversion to Hinduism ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Prayaschitham. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : Can anyone be converted into a Hindu ? Did 
Dr. Annie Besant convert herself to Hinduism ? Can Dr. Ambedkar give 
any example of a conversion to Hinduism ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : There are so many decided cases on the subject and 
if my friend will only refer to the first few pages of Mulla’s Hindu Law 
he would get all the information that he wants. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : If Dr. Ambedkar is referring to “Sudhi” 
that is a different thing. It relates to a Hindu who has left Hinduism 
and is again brought into the Hindu fold. But what is the procedure 
or the ceremony for converting any one into a Hindu ? If it is a case of 
conversion, I know the process. The person concerned must fast for a 
certain period. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is the hon. Member trying to fix the procedure 
for reconversions of Hindus, in this Code ? 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : I am only saying that there can be re- 
conversions into Hinduism, but there cannot be a conversion. Do not 
use the word “convert” here. Use some other word. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Courts have decided that there can be a convert 
to Hinduism even though he did not belong to the Hindu fold originally. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


898 


898 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : There can be re-conversion, but what about 
conversion ? The difference is only with respect to that. 

Shri Venkataraman (Madras) : The Madras High Court in the case 
of Ratansi Morarji-rs-the Administrator General, has decided that any 
person can be converted to Hinduism. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It related to an English woman and the question was 
whether a Christian could be converted into a Hindu and the answer 
was, yes. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : Will the Hon. Minister tell me the procedure 
or the ceremony for such a conversion ? It is never too late to learn, 
after all. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member himself is very particular 
that Hindu traditions etc. should be preserved. Where is the harm in 
getting as many Hindus as possible and as many people as possible 
under the Hindu Law ? 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : I only want that the author of this Bill, 
Dr. Ambedkar and the founder of our Constitution should not indulge 
in words which have no meaning. The word “convert” has no meaning 
when applied to a Hindu. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is an old anti-quated view of Mr. Chaudhuri. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : Can Dr. Ambedkar please refer me to one 
single original text of Hindu law where it is said that conversion to 
Hinduism is possible ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I can refer the hon. Member to the case of Morarji- 
vs the Administrator General. 

The Minister of State for Transport and Railways (Shri 
Santhanam) : And there is a monument in Bhilsa which speaks of a 
Greek having been converted into a Hindu. 

Dr. Tek Chand (Punjab) : And many born Christians and Moslems have 
become Hindus. If my hon. friend wants he can bring any such persons 
now and they will be converted by Aryas to Hinduism and absorbed in 
Hindu Society. I have several books giving cases of conversions even 
during Moslem rule and he can have them and read them at his leisure. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Oh do not do that, Mr. Chaudhuri never reads. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : I am afraid the hon. Members confusing 
between conversion and re-conversion and also between conversion and 
initiation. Anyone can be initiated into Hinduism. I am not speaking 
about that. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


899 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 899 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : But he says there can be conversion also. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : Let us abandon that point now Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I thought the hon. Member has concluded ? 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : Practically it is a conclusion for me, for I 
am going away to-morrow. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Will a few more minutes do ? 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : No. Sir, a few more minutes will not suffice. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker : Then we may adjourn. 

The House then adjourned till a Quarter to Eleven of the Clock on 
Wednesday the 7th February 1951 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 900 

900 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

*HINDU CODE — Contd. 

Mr. Speaker : The House will now proceed with the further consideration 
of the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of the Hindu Law, as 
reported by the Select Committee. Clause 2 is under discussion. 

Shri Gautam (Uttar Pradesh) : Before proceeding further, I would 
request you , Sir, to clarify one point. I understand — I was not present 
yesterday in the afternoon ; therefore I am raising this question — that one 
of the speakers used some language while discussing this clause which 
is objected to by some Members. Has the attention of the hon. Speaker 
been drawn to it ? I would request you, Sir, to issue certain instructions 
so far as these things are concerned so that Members may be within 
their bounds and may not hurt the feelings of other Members. 

Shri M. A. Ayyangar (Madras) : May I say, Sir, what happened ? 

Mr. Speaker : He need not repeat those things. 

Shri M. A. Ayyangar (Madras) : No; I am not going to repeat those 
statements at all, because that would defeat the very purpose. Yesterday, 
unfortunately, some remarks, I think, quite unwittingly, escaped the 
mouth of one of the hon. Members who was speaking. No doubt, he always 
speaks in good humour and nothing is taken exception to. Unfortunately, 
it descended to something which was not desirable. As soon as it was 
pointed out to me, as I was in the Chair, I directed that that portion of 
the statement ought to be expunged from the records. I thought the matter 
was over. I think all are agreed, and the hon. Member also expressed 
regret for having made that statement quite unwittingly, that that chapter 
is closed. It does not form part of the record. I do not think there is any 
need to bring up the matter again to you for any particular action. 

Mr. Speaker : I would only say that I trust that members will take 
sufficient note of this and so deliver their speeches and pass remarks 
that there many be no occasion again to repeat this kind of thing. 

Shri Frank Anthony (Madhya pradesh) : A bad example is set by 
the Treasury Benches. 

Mr. Speaker : Let us now proceed further with the Bill. 

Shri B. Das (Orissa) : Sir, I see the debate on clause 2 has descended 
to the level of a general debate on the whole Bill. I think today is the 
last date fixed by you for passing this Hindu Code 

Several Hon. Members : No, no. 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. Does the hon. Member want to put any 
time-limit ? 


P.D. Vol. VIII, Part II, 7th February 1951, pp. 2486-2537. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


901 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 901 

Several Hon. Members: No no. 

Shri B. Das: I want that on clause 2 there should be a closure 

Several Hon. Members: No no. 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order, hon. Members need not say yes or no. 
Let there be a motion for closure and if it is the general feeling that 
there has been sufficient discussion, I will accept closure. But, even if 
I accept it, the matter rests with the House ; they may acceptor reject 
the closure motion. As regards the character of the debate, though I do 
feel that we are going into very general remarks, yet, I myself do not 
know how the discussion could be restricted, particularly in view of the 
nature of clause 2. Some communities are sought to be included ; some are 
sought to be excluded. There are amendments on both sides. Therefore, 
a general survey to justify the inclusion or exclusion of the provisions 
becomes to some extent at least necessary. That is why I was feeling 
difficulty in restricting debate on that point. However, I believe there 
are no points or explanations to be asked. Let us proceed immediately 
with the consideration of the Bill. 

*Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar) : The debate has now gone on 
for full two days. If the speeches made in this House are any indication 
of the reception that the Code is going to have in the country, even an 
optimist and ardent supporter of the Code like the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar 
should have no difficulty in arriving at the correct conclusion. 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha (Bihar) : May I point out, Sir, that the supporters 
of the Bill have not spoken so far. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : It is no fault of the House, or even of 
those who do not agree with this Code if the supporters of the Bill do 
not like to rise and support their cause. How are we to know how many 
of them in their own hearts support and outwardly do not propose to 
do so ? 

Shrimati Renuka Ray (West Bengal) : Take the vote and see. 

Shri Raj Bahadur (Rajasthan) : If I understood correctly, Sir, you 
are at present calling those hon. Members who have moved amendments. 

Mr. Speaker : Anybody, who wishes to support or oppose the Bill is 
welcome to do so. 

Shri Syamanandan Sahaya : Sir, this bill has been, in various 
stages, before the country for, if I may say so, quite a long time, 

* P.D., Vol. VIII, Part II, 7th February 1951, pp. 2488-99. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


902 


902 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and opinions either in favour or against the Bill have been expressed 
both in the Press and on public platforms and even in this House on 
many occasions. I have no doubt in my mind that if the opinions are 
scrutinised very well, they will disclose not merely an opposition to 
the provisions of the Code 

Shri Sonavane (Bombay) : On A point of order, Sir. We are now 
dealing with clause 2 relating to “Application of the Code”. The 
discussion should be on scope of clause 2 and not a general discussion. 
Is the hon. Member allowed to have a general discussion on the Code 
as such ? 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : May I, Sir, with your permission, 
say 

Mr. Speaker : There is no point of order. I just explained a few 
minutes ago that when you are discussing the “Application of the 
Code”, when you want to include certain communities or exclude certain 
communities, it becomes perfectly competent and relevant to show how 
the various provisions adversely affect or benefit the communities. 
That is why I said it is very difficult to restrict the whole discussion 
at this stage to specifically certain portions of the Bill. For example, 
I believe, yesterday, Sardar Hukam Singh, went into the question of 
marriages and went into the question of succession. It could not be 
excluded as irrelevant discussion because it is sought to enact that 
this Bill should apply to Sikhs also. He is perfectly entitled to show 
how this Bill adversely affected the Sikhs in the matter of marriages 
or customs or succession. That is how the points are interconnected. 
Therefore, it will be better if such points are not raised over and over 
again. 

Shri Sonavane: But, Sir 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: As I was saying, if the opinions so far 
expressed — they are quite voluminous — and are in the possession of 
the Hon. Law Member himself — are carefully scrutinised, they would 
not merely disclose the opposition to the various provisions of this 
Code, but would also disclose an anguish, a feeling of anxiety, and a 
feeling of great concern, among the Hindu community over this Code. 
I know and I fully realise the sincerity of purpose of those who want 
to lead the community on a different channel. This is nothing new 
in history. Every reformer, perhaps, would not have been a reformer, 
if he had not thought that what he himself thought of religion was 
the right thing and that every other thing, as was said here by 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


903 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 903 

the Mover, was archaic. Therefore, although I may congratulate the Hon. 
Law Minister for evolving a new religion which it is left to posterity to 
adopt or not to adopt, so far as present conditions are concerned, I must 
certainly warn him and Government that it would be a suicidal policy 
to make it an obligatory legislation. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : We are prepared to commit 
suicide. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : This reform can only be considered 
either as a social reform or a religious reform. If it is a social reform, 
I don’t see why the Hon. The Law Minister entered a caveat yesterday 
when some hon. Member suggested that it should be made all pervading. 
In that connection he urged that we ought to have consideration and 
regard for the sentiments and feelings of non-Hindus in this country. I 
am really surprised that while he advocated that for the non-Hindus, he 
does not seem at present to have any regard for the feelings of Hindus in 
this matter. Speaker after speaker in this House, coming from different 
parts of the country, belonging to certain different sects or certain 
sections of the Hindu community, have explained how they feel about the 
application of the provisions of this Code to them. Therefore, while this 
reform may, in the opinion of some, be called for, and urgently called 
for, yet, I do submit that it will not be fair to make it an obligatory 
legislation. I have, therefore, great pleasure in according my support to 
the amendment of Shri Jaspat Roy Kapoor who suggests that it should 
be left open to members of the Hindu community, or for the matter of 
that of any other community, to accept this Code and register their will 
to be governed by it. If on the other hand it is held that it is some type 
of a religious legislation, then I think Dr. Ambedkar will concede that 
this is neither the appropriate time nor even proper for a secular State 
to attempt some kind of a religious legislation. I consider that this reform 
is of a social nature. And from time of which we have any record, we 
have known that these social reforms have to be of a permissive nature 
so that people may be able to adopt them with pleasure. In civilised life, 
even conversion by force is not permissible, and I am sure Dr. Ambedkar 
will not make any attempt at forcible conversion to the religion which 
he propagates now through this Hindu Code. 

When the Minister of Law started his speech yesterday — he will 

„ Pardon my saying so — I think he was a little nervous about 

12 Noon j j fa 

his case, because normally he is not opt to go about hitting 
right and left. He has given this House the very good example of 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


904 


904 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

very sound arguments at all time, some of them most difficult, both here 
and in the Constituent Assembly. But yesterday, he started his speech 
hitting right and left and calling those who had moved amendments and 
made speeches in support of them as being absurd and if I remember 
right, as being foolish and 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava (Ajmer) : And devoid of commonsense. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Yes, and devoid of commonsense. Well, 
though I did not like it, and though it hurt me, still as one who does 
not agree with him in getting this Hindu Code passed as it is, I felt a 
little happy that the author of the Bill was so nervous that he was not 
stable at all. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh) : When the case is poor, abuse 
the adversary. 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Now, it we scrutinise the provisions of 
the law carefully, we will find that there are really some tremendous 
difficulties which the mere passing of this Code is not likely to solve. 

[Mr. Deputy- Speaker in the Chair.] 

After all, a social reform has to keep not merely, the individual but 
the whole society in view. And if certain provisions of this Code are 
given effect to, without any consideration to the particular manner in 
which society has been running for a long time, it will end in breaking 
up society as it is today. Therefore, I submit that it is necessary that 
this Code, if passed at all, should be permissive so that people who 
would like to be governed by it may do so with their eyes wide open. 

Let us also see, what was the original intention of those who decided to 
have a Hindu Code. I will refer you, Sir, and the House to an important 
recommendation of the Hindu Law Committee popularly called as the 
Rau Committee. At page 13 of their report in paragraph 50, they say : 

“Most of the provisions in the Code are of a permissive or enabling 
nature, and impose no sort of compulsion or obligation whatever on the 
orthodox. Their only effect is to give a growing body of Hindus, men and 
women, the liberty to live the lives which they wish to lead without in 
anyway affecting or infringing the similar liberty of those who prefer 
to adhere to the old ways”. 

This recommendation, I submit, is very clear and it was made after 
the Committee had toured round the whole country and ascertained 
the views of the Hindu community. This recommendation must have 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


905 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 905 

been made in all seriousness and I submit there is no reason for us now 
to depart from this very important decision of the Committee, whose 
recommendations are the basis of the Code which we are considering 
today. I do not know whether the mass of evidence collected by this 
Committee has been carefully gone into and if it is so done. I have no 
doubt in my mind that the Government of India will come to a similar 
decision with regard to the applicability of this measure. 

Some friends yesterday made a suggestion about taking a referendum 
on this very important issue. Here again we find the Hon. Law Minister 
wholly opposed to it and not only that but the climax was reached 
when he said that the electorate are ignorant and they are people who 
do not know anything about this matter 

Shri Bharati (Madras): About the technicalities of the matter. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: You heard his speech and so did I. 
The records are here. It is not a question of technicality at all. Every 
member of the Hindu community in this country knows fully what 
he wants so far as his religious and social laws are concerned and 
there will be no difficulty, in my opinion, in taking a referendum 
on a question like this. When I recalled that he who was the main 
architect of the Constitution of India and he who was an ardent 
advocate of adult franchise should now speak so disparagingly about 
democratic methods, it was not only a surprise but a shock to me 
and I thought within myself whether what the Hon. Law Minister 
himself said yesterday about the leopard not changing spots was as 
true today as when it was said. We cannot forget that wherever or 
whenever democracy is inaugurated they do not start it with the entire 
electorate being as educated as one would like them to be. Let us not 
forget that deomcracy is its own teacher and the more you consult 
your electorate the more you give them the chance to express their 
opinion, the more conscious and the more educated you make them. I 
therefore submit for the consideration of the Law Minister that there 
cannot be a more approriate method of consulting the electorate today 
than a referendum on the Hindu Code. After all whether the electorate 
today is politically conscious to that extent or not, it certainly will 
have to be admitted that so far as religious sentiments and feelings 
and religious laws are concerned they are fully conscious and if you 
ask any man in the streets of a town or village, he will be able to tell 
you what is good for him. I therefore submit that even now there is a 
chance and opportunity and the Law Minister will do well to consult 
the electorate on a matter like this. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


906 


906 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

An Hon. Member : He is his own electorate ! 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : But if he chooses not to do so as 
it appears, then I will submit to him to make the law a permissive 
legislation. If he makes the law an obligatory legislation — I do not 
know for what he will take my warning worth — but let me tell him 
that he will fail in his attempt as did the Slave Kings of yore — the 
Lodis, the Tughlaks, the Khiljis, the Sayyids and the Moguls — who 
attempted in vain to eradicate the old religion and the old religious 
laws, which he called archaic yesterday. I have no doubt that his 
attempt at ending what he called archaic laws will fail in the same 
manner as did the attempts of others similarly placed in authority for 
thousands of years. There is something more than mere laws in the 
Hindu system of Social Codes. Its foundations have been much more 
deeply laid and could not be shaken by legislations passed in such 
haste without consulting the people affected. 

When listening to the speech of the Hon. Law Minister I was reminded 
of a story which for a long time was published by the Amrita Bazar 
Patrika year after year on a particular day. The story was about an old 
Pandit and Pandits are proverbially poor. His wife pestered him from 
time to time about finance for running the household. The Pandit was 
able to fork out a rupee or two now and then to enable the household 
to be carried on. One fine morning he struck upon something very 
novel and told his wife, “You need not worry about funds any more. 
I have found out a device by which I can get a lakh of rupees.” The 
wife asked him what was the device. He said “I have composed a few 
couplets last night and I shall go to the Raja tomorrow morning and 
place before him the couplets. I will tell him that if he could find 
any Pandit in his Durbar who will be able to interpret the couplets 
then I would pay him a lakh of rupees. If, on the other hand, no one 
can interpret my couplets the Raja would have to pay me a lakh of 
rupees.” The wife laughed and said ‘You must be a fool. Supposing 
some one interpreted the couplets, where are you going to get the 
one lakh from to pay to the Raja ?” The Pandit in his turn laughed 
and said “You ladies have no imagination. You people never had any 
since creation ” 

An Hon. Member : Is it your opinion ? 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Not mine, it is the Pandit’s opinion. 
I cannot speak so disparagingly of women. Continuing, the Pandit 
said” It is very simple.” She asked what was it and the Pandit said 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


907 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 907 

“I shall accept no interpretation. The Pandits will come and go and I shall 
accept nobody’s interpretation. I will say that is not the interpretation and 
ultimately the Raja will have to fork out the one lakh of rupees.” Even 
so whatever advice or suggestion or opinion we may express here., if the 
Hon. Law Minister is in the mood of the Pandit what can we do ? We 
have to appeal to him and tell him what is the opinion outside. I have 
no doubt that he will depend upon us for giving him such information 
as we are capable of gathering by going round our constituencies... 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have more information than you have. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : You may have more than what I 
personally have but I am talking of the Members of the House and I am 
not talking of myself only. I dare not say that I have more information 
than you have 

An Hon. Member : What about the lakh of rupees ? 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : The Pandit got the lakh of rupees all 
right. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab) : Has the Hon. Minister 
not admitted before in this House that public opinion does not favour 
this Bill ? 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Has he ? I am very glad. That very 
strongly supports my case. If that is so, then there is no ground for 
the Hon. Minister to come to this House at all with this Code. In any 
case the difficulty arises when you come into power : then, naturally 
apart from power, one has also the feeling that one has the knowledge, 
the information, which no one else possesses. Mr. Gladstone was once 
rebuked by Queen Victoria by remarking, “You must know, Mr. Prime 
Minister, that I am the Queen, the Sovereign of England” And Gladstone 
hit back by saying. “Yes, Your Majesty, but I am the people of England”. 
So, you Mr. Law Minister may be today the Sovereign of India., we are 
the People of India, and if you don’t listen to us you will go the way 
the sovereigns have gone. Whether you like it or you don’t, this is what 
will happen. 

This matter of the Hindu Code, in my opinion, should not be taken — 
pardon my saying so — as it is being taken. Religious reforms and 
social reforms are certainly necessary. No one could possibly get up 
in this House and say, “No, we shall stay where we are”. What are 
we then asking you to do ? We are only asking that the legislation be 
made permissive. Let the people know all about it. Let them think 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


908 


908 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

over the matter and having considered the whole matter if they think 
it is for the betterment of the country, for the betterment of the society, 
they will accept it. But do not for God’s sake make it obligatory. 

Shri R. Velayudhan (Travancore-Cochin) : Then what is the meaning 
of a legislation ? Why have it ? 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : I will explain to you presently what 
is the meaning of legislation. You are perhaps fresh to a legislature. 
Otherwise you would not have asked that question. Anyway I will reply 
to you in a few minutes. 

Shri R. Velayudhan : I have read the Hindu Code. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : You have read the Hindu Code. That 
is good enough. Then you will go to heaven straight. 

If you look at the legislation and the different parts of it, you will find 
that on various details certain exceptions have been made in the Code 
itself. Now, the Code excludes in certain respects the two communities 
following Marumakkattayam and Aliyasantana laws. And yesterday the 
Hon. Law Minister said that he was omitting sub-clause (4) to allow 
some type of married men to be governed by the Succession Act, that 
is those who were married under the Special Marriages Act. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : He said it was more liberal. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Well, if it is more liberal for them I 
do not see why the more liberal law should not be good for everybody. 
He is codifying the Hindu Law — not laying down any new but bringing 
up-to-date in certain respects the existing laws and bringing in some 
reforms. If you want you can be more liberal — who prevents you ? But 
after all, if you claim that one of the main purposes of this Act in the 
first place is to codify the Hindu Law, keeping in view the different 
rulings and different interpretations and making the best use of them 
and also introducing progressive reforms — if that is so then I don’t 
see why you should have one set of succession laws for one class of 
married Hindus and another set for another class. If you want to do 
it, do it. There is no use saying that such of our friends here who 
advocate the passing of a Civil Code do not really want it. Pardon 
me for saying so, but let me assure the Hon. Law Minister that it is 
not so. The feeling is that if you want to put the whole country on a 
certain basis even if it meant some sacrifice, do so and we will gladly 
accept it. But you pick and choose and single out one community 
who perhaps would not be prepared to fight with you on that issue. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


909 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 909 

If you pick out that community and do what you like with it, and the 
rest say, “Don’t touch our religious susceptibilities”, then that is where 
the real difficulty arises. 

Then the Code already excludes customary laws which will operate 
in spite of the Hindu Code. Exclusion has also been permitted for those 
who were governed by separate customs although they may be belonging 
to the Hindu community : so that it will be found that these differences 
and these exclusions, these permissions to be able to be governed by 
another law are already found to the Code. I therefore submit that it is 
not really asking too much of the Hon. Law Minister and of this House 
to make this Code a permissive legislation. 

There are other difficulties also which I would like to mention for the 
kind and sympathetic consideration of the Hon. Law Minister. 

Lor instance, it is laid down mat all divorces henceforth will have 
to be registered. When I read this — not only this but other paragraphs 
and other sections of the Code — I felt like exclaiming that the Code 
was really a heaven for lawyers, and that if anyone was going to profit 
or benefit by this it would be the past colleagues in law courts of the 
Hon. Minister. You may pass this Code tomorrow. Supposing we all 
agree that we shall not discuss this legislation any more and we pass 
it tomorrow, even if we do so do we really and seriously think that the 
people living in the villages, whom the Hon. Law Minister refuses to 
consult by a referendum because they are ignorant, will from day after 
tomorrow start registering all their divorces and all their marriages? 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is no provision for registering divorces. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : I am sorry if I take time but before 
the House rises I shall read out to the Hon. Minister this provision. I 
have already tabled an amendment on that clause. 

Shri Bharati : Registration for marriages only. There is no registration 
for divorces. You make a mistake. 

Mr. Deputy-Speaker : The hon. Member evidently means that there 
can be under the Code no divorce except by a decree of court. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Yes. The hon. Member has again 
drawn a distinction between tweedledum and tweedledee though it 
was not expected that he of all persons would take recourse to these. 
Well, if it is not registration and if it is only through law courts, then 
it strengthens my argument all the more. Is it possible to imagine, 
when we have a vast majority of people — thirty-three crores — many 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


910 


910 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of them living in rural areas, not knowing anything about procedural 
laws and rules, is it possible to imagine each of them going to court 
for marriage and divorce ? I had thought it was only registration where 
the lawyers would get very little fee. But if it is the law courts then 
I have no doubt, and the house and the Hon. Law Minister will agree 
with me, that it is a heaven for the lawyers. In this vast country at 
least for some time to come — I should say for a long time to come, 
but certainly for some time to come — there is no justification for such 
an obligatory legislation to be passed. Give them the chance — if they 
think it is necessary then let them adopt it. 

We have said a lot and the Code also claims for itself a very great 
and progressive position when you say we are giving this and we 
are giving that to the women of our country. I suppose that up to a 
certain point there is something to be said about it. But if we study 
the social conditions today among the Hindus, shall we not agree 
that these ladies in their households are almost each of them an 
Alexander unto herself ? You want to reduce that position of being the 
monarch of all they survey to that of a mere partner and you know 
what respect partners evoke, particularly when you are doing away 
with the joint family system. In a joint family system, the partners 
had a certain respect and position. There was inter-dependence and 
therefore one partner cared for the other partner. But having done 
away with the joint family system, you want to reduce the women 
to the position of a partner. If you are a partner, you have your set 
rights and your set quota. Today, the women are the masters of the 
whole household. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes, very much. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Tomorrow, you will make them 
partners. 

An Hon. Member : Partners in what ? 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Partners in property. 

An Hon. Member : Not in life ? 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : I meant partners in property. After 
all, she gets something from her father’s house. She is the owner of 
that. She feels she has got something by herself. Why should you not 
make her depend upon the newly acquired house of her husband ? 
You know, after all, properties create difficulties. I know of families, 
not one but many, where the power of attorney by the wife is not 
held by the husband but by some other person. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


911 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 911 

Dr. Ambedkar : There may be very good reason for it. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : That is what your Code will reduce the 
Hindu community to. If some people like it, then of course I have no 
objection to their adopting it. 

Shri Raj Bahadur : Hence the necessity for divorce. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : I know young people like you are very 
anxious to have divorce laws, but there are other people who have to 
think of your welfare. 

So, these are the difficulties about this legislation and before I resume 
my seat I would strongly urge upon this House and the Hon. the Law 
Minister to accept the amendment of making this legislation permissive. 
Otherwise, I am afraid it will not be taken so lightly by Hindus as 
Government think. It is going to create a great furor in the country. 

Dr. Ambedkar : No. 

Shri Himatsingka (West Bengal) : Dr. Ambedkar is not afraid. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I don’t think so at all. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : I have no doubt in my mind that the 
Hon. the Law Minister is not afraid. He need not be afraid either. I had 
attempted not to say this, but I am doing so now. When I was last in 
my constituency, some people came to me and said, “You have not been 
a Congressman before” I said, “Yes, I have not been a Congressman 
before.” They said, “You also dine with Muslims and are not orthodox 
and you are not a very devout Hindu.” I said, “Yes. I am not a very 
orthodox Hindu in that sense.” And then they said, “Is it therefore that 
this Hindu Code has been invented which has the effect of a bullet that 
kills two birds at the same time, namely, the Hindu community and the 
Congress ? If the Congress Government is not circumspect and responsive 
to public opinion even after this, let them go the way they like. The 
country and the people will decide what to do with them.” 

*Shri Alagesan (Madras) : Unfortunately yesterday the House was 
plunged into a mood which detracted very much from the seriousness of 
the measure that is before us. I am glad that we have now regained the 
proper mood to consider it more seriously than before. Yesterday, the 
Hon. the Law Minister put up a very vigorous plea for the acceptance 
of the Code and his amendments. He is always a superb advocate. 
Apart from the content of Iris speech, the tone and the manner of 
it brought even those who oppose him very near getting convinced. 

* P.D., Vol. VIII, Part II, 7th February 1951, pp. 2499-2504. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


912 


912 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Venkataraman (Madras) : But you were not. 

Shri C. Subramaniam (Madras) : That is why he said “very near”. 

Shri Alagesan : I would like to be completely convinced, but I 
am sorry to say that I am not convinced. I would still urge the Hon. 
the Law Minister to bring forward a common civil code, though he 
derided the idea and even went to the length of attributing motives 
to those who wanted such a thing. For instance, he asked : “How is it 
possible that those who oppose the Hindu Code tooth and nail would 
accept a common civil code ?” He questioned their motives. But I would 
respectfully ask him. “Why is it that they object to this Hindu Code ?” 
Is it not due to the fact — partly at least — that it does not apply to 
the entire nation ? It applies only to one community, however large a 
section it may be. Thus, this Code is only a sectional measure and it 
is not a common measure for all. Is not the opposition to it, at least 
partly, due to this fact it does not embrace the entire nation and the 
entire community ? 

Again, he said that he would produce legislation tomorrow, as if 
anybody doubted his capacity to produce legislative texts. He threatened 
to bring the text of a common and universal code tomorrow and confront 
the House with considering it. But that is not the main thing about 
it. If he proposes to confront this House with a common civil code, 
then it has to be considered in all its aspects and bearings by one and 
all and he will be the first person to come forward with amendments 
to that code. He said yesterday that no legal ingenuity can improve 
upon the Indian Succession Act, but I am sure, the artist that he is, 
he will go on amending even the best piece of legislation. Even for 
this Hindu Code, we find that his amendments are larger in number 
than the amendments proposed by any other Member. He can amend, 
and amend because others want it and desire it. 

Again, he went on to expatiate on the sovereign and supreme nature 
of this Parliament. Nobody ever questioned it, but the sovereignty 
and the supreme nature of this House need not have been affirmed 
at the cost of an insult to the master of this House. That was the 
unfortunate part of it. Though we are a sovereign body, we are subject 
to the people’s will and our sanction is the people’s will. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh (Bihar) : Hear, hear. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Why don’t you live in the village rather than live 
here ? You will be a better master there than you are here. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


913 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 913 

Shri Alagesan : I wish to put a counter question to the Hon. 
the Law Minister. He said that those who oppose the Hindu Code 
cannot agree to a common civil code. It is impossible, he said, because 
he knew those persons very well. Everybody knows that the new 
elections will be held all over the country for this Parliament as well 
as for the legislatures of the various States within a year’s time. It 
is not necessary that because this House is sovereign and supreme 
it should take upon itself the task of legislating on each and every 
subject. It may postpone some legislation : it may leave, with profit, 
some legislation to the House that will be elected within a very 
short time, and I do not doubt that the Hon. the Law Minister will 
concede that the new House that is going to be elected will have 
more time and will certainly be better placed and will certainly 
reflect the latest opinion and mood and temper of the people than 
this House can ever do. Will he not concede that such a House will 
be better placed to enact this piece of legislation than this house 
is ? And if he does not choose to do it, if he does not choose to leave 
the matter in the hands of the House that is to come, is it due to 
the fact that he is afraid that this measure will not be passed by 
that House ? Shall I attribute such a motive to him, though I would 
not like to do it ? (An Hon. Member : You have done it.) Why then 
does he fight shy of placing this all-comprehensive codification of 
Hindu law, before the new Parliament of this country ? I think he 
should satisfactorily answer this question. 

But the chief complaint against the present Government, if one 
can say so, is this. After we have succeeded in our revolution, we 
have failed more in the psychological sphere than in other spheres. 
We have failed to enthuse the people : we have failed to strike 
that emotional chord in the people which alone binds them to us. 
Everybody is worried on this account. Why ? It is good that we 
consider this question and examine it a little more carefully. In 
my opinion, we have decided largely on a policy of carry-over. We 
simply carry on the old traditions and we have not done anything 
to show a striking change which appeals to the people. This Hindu 
Code is an instance in point. It has been conceived under quite 
different circumstances, when we were under the impression that 
everything that is Hindu is wrong and cannot be correct. We 
wanted to reform, we wanted to change, but not with a proper 
appreciation, in my opinion. We are simply carrying that over. 
We are trying to model the Hindu Code as a code that will apply 
to the Hindu community, though it is a very great community 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


914 


914 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

in this country, and not to all. It is because we have failed to 
introduce any innovation that we are in this mess. We have got 
everything that goes to make an emotional appeal to the people 
and yet we have strikingly failed in that field. That is something 
like a play with all the ace actors and yet the play fails to impress 
the audience. Our performance I shall liken to that. 

What is the reaction that we have produced in the country by 
bringing forward this measure ? Supposing we had brought forward 
a common measure that would have applied to one and all. Then 
there would have been an electrical change in the atmosphere in 
the country ; there would have been an atmosphere of realism 
with regard to this measure. We would have been able to consider 
this measure more realistically than we are at present doing. And 
that we have failed to do. If we had done that we would have 
convinced the entire country that we are taking cudgels against 
and demolishing all differences based on caste and religion in the 
true spirit of our secular democracy. We would have incidentally 
translated our ideal of secular democracy into action and would 
have convinced everybody. Now there is not even a ripple on the 
surface except the placid placard holders outside this House and 
the imposing police cordon ; and perhaps occasional crowds in the 
galleries in multi-hued saris. We have not succeeded in producing 
any greater effect than this. But, I am sure that if the Hon. the 
Law Minister were to come forward with a common code that will 
embrace all communities, then the whole country will take interest 
in it and try to be more realistic about it. I may also venture to say 
that the reaction outside our country would also be much better, 
because at present we are held up to ridicule in the outside world 
by interested parties that we are a nation wedded to caste with 
the result that our prestige suffers. A common code would have 
done everything to dispel such a misunderstanding. 

Again, there have already been instance where the Hindu law 
embraced other communities. I am told the Moplahs of Malabar, 
the Kutch Momins and the Khoja community, the followers of the 
Aga Khan, were all following the Hindu law and were governed 
by the Hindu law up till the year 1937 when the Shariat Act was 
passed. I am told that even the author of Pakistan was governed 
by the Hindu law. When such is the case why should you fight shy 
of bringing forward a common code which will embrace all Hindus, 
Muslims, Christians and so on ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


915 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 915 

Yesterday, the Hon. the Law Minister was very pleased with the 
speech of my friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava. He was all praise 
for the Code. He showered encomium on the Hon. the Law Minister for 
having thought fit to bring forward this measure. But, he made one 
very important reservation. He said all this only on the condition that it 
should not apply to the Punjab. He made an observation that those who 
have moved amendments are trying to rope in the other communities, 
the non-Hindus in this Act, and he asked whether the non-Hindus in 
this House are prepared to come under this measure. He went on to 
answer the question himself in the negative. But, I have consulted some 
of the non-Hindu Members of this House and they are quite willing to 
have a common code. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Non- Hindus ? 

Shri Alagesan : Yes, non-Hindus. 

Shri Bharati : May I have the names of those Members ? 

Shri Alagesan : The hon. Member may have it later from me ? 

As it is, we are doing a great injustice to the non-Hindu Members 
of this House. They are unable to take any interest in this discussion. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Why, Mr. Nazruddin Ahmad has. 

Shri Alagesan : He only reflects the opinion of his clients. The other 
non-Hindu Members of this House simply sit back and relax. They are 
not able to take any lively interest in the discussion, if they support it 
they are afraid of wounding the susceptibilities of the orthodox section 
of the Hindus: if they oppose it they are afraid of still more terrible 
elements. So thay are playing a passive role. 

Prof. Ranga (Madras) : They support the Bill. 

Shri Alagesan : That is doubtful. It is, therefore, necessary that we 
should make this measure more representative. Because, there will be 
nothing objectionable in it. If monogamy is good for a Hindu it ought 
to be equally good for a Muslim. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Better for him. 

Shri Alagesan : The present day Indian Muslim would not, I think, 
oppose it on religious grounds, because when Muslims were permitted 
to marry up to four wives perhaps it might have been on account 
of the expanding phase of the Arab Empire. They wanted to expand 
and conserve, and so they were permitted to marry up to four wives, 
perhaps. But now we are faced with an entirely different situation 
in this country. Though our Prime Minister likes and loves to play 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


916 


916 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

with children and forget many of his worries, he is not prepared to 
greet their first arrival in this country. He has said so openly, and 
the prospect of more and more children certainly frightens him as 
well as it frightens everyone. It is a patent fact. I have no doubt 
our Muslim friends will realize it and try to fall in line, whatever 
their present religious law or practice may be. So it is not as if there 
are insurmountable barriers in the way of evolving a common civil 
code for this country. 

I would like to quote the example of China. It is as ancient as our 
country. Apart from the ancient texts, they have recently evolved 
a civil law which embraces and tries to enact the three principles 
of the people enunciated by Dr. Sun Yat Sen. These principles, as 
the House knows, are nationalism, democracy and popular economic 
progress. We can very well follow the example of China, as we are 
placed in a similar situation, and try to put in our principles, the 
principles that the Father of the Nation placed before the country, 
and make them a reality. Nothing would have pleased him better 
than the bringing within the ambit of one civil code all the great 
religions that inhabit this country, 

My hon. friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava waxed eloquent and 
welcomed most of the things that are found in the Code because he 
was sure that they would not apply to him. He welcomed all the 
salient features of the Code because he was sure that they would form 
the basis for the future civil code of this country, and he felt that 
this was a right step in that direction. But I am afraid I am unable 
to accept his plea. I am afraid it only side-tracks and postpones the 
question of evolving a civil code. Now that we have done our best 
by the Hindu community we would not bother about a common civil 
code, because the impression generally is — and I think there is good 
ground for it — that we are prepared to meddle with everything that 
is Hindu but we are fighting shy when it concerns others.] 

Prof. Ranga : One by one. 

Shri Alagesan : I only wish that the prophesy of the professor 
will come true, that you will approach others also and try 
to reform them also. But as it is, the impression is gaining 
ground — and that is the ruling impression — that we are prepared 
here to go only to the Hindu community and none else. And 
that in my opinion is the chief psychological barrier to the 
passing of this measure. I hope the Hon. Law Minister with 
all his ingenuity will devise something which will dispel this 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 917 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 917 

misapprehension and try to convince not only the members of this 
House but also the people outside and then launch upon his offensive. 

*Shri Biswanath Das (Orissa): Sir, I thank you very much for 
having given me a chance to have my say in the course of discussions 
over the Hindu Code Bill. I was really trying to play the role of a 
backbencher in regard to the discussions on this Bill. But certain 
views expressed by the Hon. Minister of Law have goaded me to 
speak and record my protest. 

In the course of his speech — need I say very lucid and analytical, 
speech — he used certain choice expressions which are not only 
unwarranted but uncalled for. He has declined the demand for a 
referendum. I am not very much in favour of a referendum. I am 
not very much in favour of a referendum after all that has taken 
place. But to call it ‘absurd’ is as absurd as the absurdity itself. You 
are going to legislate on very important matters, namely, questions 
relating to marriage, divorce, adoption, joint family, women’s 
property, succession, maintenance and the rest. The Hon. the Law 
Minister himself has recognized and admitted that the system of 
Hindu Law involves not only the legal frames of the society but 
also of our religious precepts would it be fair for him to take up the 
legislation of such important questions which concern the society, the 
life and living of crores of people of this country, without consulting 
the people themselves ? In the course of his speech he stated that 
he does not know of any country where a plebiscite is taken for 
legislation. Even in ordinary matters, such as nationalisation and 
the rest, important political parties have refused to undertake 
such responsibility in a democracy. They dissolve Parliament and 
go and take the mandate of the country on such important issues. 
I would ask the Hon. Minister whether the principles involved in 
the Bill are less important than those in England and elsewhere 
where Parliaments have been dissolved and a mandate of the 
people has been demanded and taken. Does it come well from him 
to say that these are not matters on which a popular mandate is 
necessary. Let me not think of a plebiscite or even a dissolution 
of Parliament or anything of the nature demanded by some of my 
friends though those are relevant, logical and constitutional. We 
are an indirectly elected Legislature. Parliament has to carry on 
business till the House is duly constituted. It is more or less in 
the nature of a caretaker Parliament I do not dispute the technical 


P.D., Vol. VIII, Part II, 7th February 1951, pp. 2504-17. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


918 


918 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

right of this House to pass any legislation. But constitutionally, it looks 
to me odd to say that on such an important legislation as this, we are 
to be refused to take the mandate of the people. Is it because he is well 
impressed of the fact that the people on consultation would not allow 
him to go on with the legislation ? Otherwise, where is the need on his 
insistence not to put off legislation which is hanging fire so long and 
also to insist upon one question, namely, that it shall be passed only 
in this House. I ask why in this House ? What sin has this Parliament 
committed ? Is it because it is an indirectly elected legislature ? I would 
tell him that he is as good a representative as myself. I am elected by 
the Provincial legislature of the State of Orissa and he is elected by the 
State Legislature of Bombay. I have a right to ask the Hon. Minister 
whether he has consulted his electorate and whether he has got the 
mandate of his electorate in this regard. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not want a mandate. 

Shri Biswanath Das : You do not want a mandate. That is the 
sort of responsibility you owe to your constituency and that is the sort 
of constitutional notion that you want to inculcate into the people of 
our country. I will only refer my hon. friend to the Preamble of the 
Constitution which this House has enacted and to which my hon. friend, 
the Minister of Law has made a very notable contribution. 

The Preamble of the Constitution says : “ to constitute India into a 

Sovereign Democratic Republic and to secure to all its citizens : Justice, 

social, economic and political ; ” I want to ask him whether this is 

his sense of democracy to say “I refuse to consult the illiterate masses 
who have sent me here, who have given me the chance of representing 
the Province and which has given me the chance of assuming the reins 
of office as a Minister.” Sir, all this is under the Constitution. We assure 
all its citizens social, economic and above all political justice. I would join 
issue with my hon. friend if he says that he has not assured political 
justice to the people of the country, because he refuses to consult them, 
the very electorate that have sent him here. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Next time they won’t elect me. 

Shri Biswanath Das : It does not matter. You can stand by yourself. 
You do not need their vote and that is the reason why you find it an 
easy safety-valve. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I care more for the Code than for my election. 

Shri Biswanath Das : I am not thinking of my election. I am thinking 
of my responsibility as an elected Member of this Parliament. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


919 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 919 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is one o’clock. Have you concluded ? 

Shri Biswanath Das : I will continue in the afternoon. 

The House then adjourned for Lunch till Half Past Two of the Clock. 


The House re-assembled after Launch at Half Past Two of the Clock. 

[Mr. Deputy- Speaker in the Chair ] 

Shri Biswanath Das : Sir, in the course of my speech this morning, 
I was speaking how, in democratic countries, when important, 
legislations and questions have to be taken up and are being placed 
on the statute book, the party foresees the legislation, 

Shri Ramraj Jajware (Bihar) : On a point of order, Sir. There 
is no Member on the Treasury Benches. 

Mr. Deputy-Speaker : It is regrettable that there is nobody to 
represent Government. The Minister of Law has just come in. 

Shri Biswanath Das : ... places its programme before the 
country in the form of a manifesto, then on the basis of that 
manifesto, elections take place, and the party gets a vote in favour 
of the principles for which it stands. I claim that nothing of that 
kind is possible in an indirectly elected legislature as the present 
Parliament is. None-the-less, we have an electorate. That electorate 
is an enlightened electorate. Neither the Hon. the Law Minister nor 
his friends in this House or outside this House could say that the 
electorate to which we have the honour to belong is not enlightened. 
They are no other than the Members of the State legislatures. I 
claim that Government and the Law Minister should have taken 
necessary steps in this regard to consult the State Legislative 
Assemblies on this important legislation by requesting them to have 
their say in the matter, which would have given an opportunity to 
the country to speak itself. At the same time, it would have made 
the passage of this legislation easy and convenient: easy because 
with the command given by our electorate, it would not have been 
possible for the hon. Members of this House to oppose this legislation 
without resigning their seats ; convenient because no one would 
have had the audacity to say, “I differ from this legislation and 
yet I continue to be a Member of the House”. No one could have it 
both ways. No one could afford to be a Member of the House and 
refuse to carry out the mandate of the electorate. Therefore I claim 
-that the Hon. the Law Minister as also Government have failed in 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


920 


920 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

this important respect, which was and is still open to them. I agree with 
the Hon. Law Minister, though differing from him that this legislation 
is urgent, and immediate to be passed in this Parliament. 

By all means do not take recourse to a plebiscite ; but the time is still 
there to make a reference to the State legislatures. After all, we are not 
going to pass this Bill in this Budget session. I may, in this connection, 
state that I for myself doubt the sincerity of Government regarding the 
need for passage of this Bill. 

Several Hon. Members : No, no. 

Shri Biswanath Das : My hon. friends who are anxious may say, 
no, no. I have a right to put forward my point of view in presenting my 
case before the Members of Parliament. If they were really anxious, it 
would not have come before this House for discussion for three days. 
What is the meaning behind it ? I must frankly confess that I am unable 
to understand how in a legislation of this nature, in respect of which 
there are wide differences among us and protests all over the country, 
the Law Minister or the Cabinet expects that these could be solved and 
the Bill could be placed on the statute book within three days as my 
hon. friend Mr. B. Das was claiming. I refuse to live in a fool’s paradise. 
A legislation of this nature, unless it is to be pursued through a party 
mandate, has to continue from day to day and each person being allowed 
to have his say in the matter and try to place his points, if possible, for 
the acceptance of the House. Under these circumstances, I very much 
doubt the wisdom of the Hon. Law Minister in allotting three days, and 
that in this Budget session when you have not only to pass the Railway 
Budget, and the General Budget, but have also forty or fifty important 
Bills that are pending. Government say that they are hard-pressed for 
money. The newspapers announce that fresh taxation is awaited. I do 
not know how far that is correct. If there is any speck of truth in that, 
I have a right to ask the hon. Members on the Treasury Benches as 
to what they have done regarding the passage of the Estate Duty Bill 
which is hanging fire for the last, one and a half years. I claim that first 
things should come first. What is the problem that you have solved up till 
now ? You have solved no problem ; but you have succeeded in creating 
problems. I believe, therefore, that Government, or at least the Law 
Minister is not anxious, nor is he very alert to see that this legislation is 
passed into law. If they were so, a special sitting, that was promised by 
the Leader of the House should have been conveyed, or a special session 
could be convened to discuss the Bill thoroughly and pass it into law. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


921 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 921 

Sir, you will pardon me if I say that the Hon. Law Minister would 
not have dealt with the House in the way he is proposing to do, hurling 
insults upon individual Members of the House if it were not for the 
declaration of the hon. the Leader of the House that he stands or falls 
with this Code. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Forget that. That is not the position now. 

Shri Biswanath Das : I am not speaking to the Members : I am 
speaking to you, Sir. I will be happy if the Members will leave me alone, 
though I very much like and appreciate their help. 

Therefore, I claim that the Hon. Law Minister has not been fair to 
the hon. Members of this House. 

Then, I come to the second assertion that he made and that is the 
declaration that there is lack of commonsense in those who demand a 
common code for India. Why ? I should have been glad to be favoured 
with reasons for an insult which I claim is not merited. He said not 
only that but he proceeded further and said that he could present a 
Civil Code in two days. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Shri Biswanath Das : Then by all means, let him do so. We have 
been waiting for it for the last so many months. If it is possible to let 
us have a common Civil Code in two days, by all means let us have it. 
Let him then favour us with it. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That will do, Mr. Das. You will exhaust yourselves. 
Conserve your energy. You are not in best of health, I find. 

Shri Biswanath Das : I take note of the advice tendered by my, 
hon. friend. 

I do confess that the caste system will do no good to India, that the 
sooner it goes the better. I cannot think of a society living on the Bhat 
Handi system, on a system which says that if anyone touches my pot 
of Bhat or cooked rice, or my roti, caste is violated, because he does not 
belong to my caste. That is harmful. Let us do away with that system. 
The sooner we do that the better. At the same time, do I not realise 
that my ancestors, my forefathers have founded a system much nobler 
and much higher than the Bhat Handi system ? 

^IdejUAJ TKTT T u|ch ^ WTTcT^T: 

I created the four Varnas (i.e., fourfold castes) according to the Gunas 
(i.e., qualities), Karmas (i.e., action) and the svabhavas (i.e., natures) 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


922 


922 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Have the frame-work on the lines laid down in the Gita — that will 
be acceptable to all. Instead, what does my hon. friend do ? Instead of 
taking me upwards he takes me downwards. I could agree to go with 
him upwards, but 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : To heaven and not to hell. 

Shri Biswanath Das : To heaven or mid-heaven, but I refuse to 
go with him downwards. 

Dr. Ambedkar : You do not know how to choose your friends. 

Shri Biswanath Das : I am glad I have committed that blunder. 

Well, a common Code is not unknown. In Portuguese India you have 
it to-day. There are Hindus living in Portuguese India. Why not have 
it in India which is far more advanced than Portuguese India ? And 
if it is so easy to have a common Civil Code as my hon. friend says 
it is, let him come forward with it, and he will find at least some of 
those who are now against him will be with him. But, in respect of 
this Hindu Code, we cannot and we will never agree to go along with 
him. You cannot touch Muslim society, because then it will be the 
cry of religion being in danger. You cannot touch Christian society, 
then also it will be a question of religion being in danger. But you 
can kick Hindu society and have your new experiments propagated 
in that society with ruthless uniformity. We cannot agree. Being a 
man of sixty, I cannot agree with my hon. friend in his constitution 
of a society based on rationalism. In our country there had been 
eternal strife between spiritualism and rationality, and in that fight 
it is spiritualism that has come out and rationalism has gone down, 
and the rationalists were branded Nastikas and the spiritualists as 
Astikas. I refuse to be Nastik. The form of society that the Hon. 
Minister proposes through his Hindu Code is nothing short of a society 
for which agitation was carried on in India in days of yore, and the 
country as a whole rejected it and the country today I make bold to 
say, will reject and is bound to reject it. If my hon. friend refuses 
to leave it for option, it is because of his apprehension that society 
will not go with him. If he is afraid of a plebiscite it is because of 
his apprehension that he cannot carry the country with him. If he is 
afraid of any other legislature but a packed Parliament in an indirectly 
elected legislature, it is because of his apprehension that so bitter a 
pill as this cannot be swallowed by any other. It is these apprehensions 
that make the hon. Minister and those of his way of thinking to rush 
the measure through this Legislature. Because my leader the Hon. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


923 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 923 

the Prime Minister stated that he stands or falls by this Code, and 
though that statement was made without the concurrence of the party, 
we have to stand by him. And we do stand by him, and I appeal to him 
and I do so through the Hon. Minister of Law 

Dr. Ambedkar : A bad medium. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : But that is the only medium left. 

Shri Biswanath Das : If it is a bad medium, I leave it and I would 
appeal to you, Sir, for that is the only medium left to me now. 

Mr. Deputy-Speaker : This medium is colourless. 

Shri Biswanath Das : I appeal to him to eleminate the most 
controversial items in the Code so that there may be an easy passage. I 
have already stated, and I repeat it, that we cannot agree to this Code, 
and so far as I am concerned, even on my death-bed I will record my 
protest and say “no” to any attempt to constitute Hindu society on a 
rationalistic basis, as is being proposed in this Bill. 

My hon. friend said that he was only making the legislation easy. 
As a student I knew, and most of my friends here also know that we 
were accustomed to read not text -books but “made easies”. Some of the 
professors of the Calcutta university used to make a lot of money by 
bringing out such “made easies” editions. And I know the terrible trouble 
that the students had to take because of this. Hon. Members will find 
reference in the Calcutta University Commission’s Report — I think it is 
the Sadler Commission’s Report — to the system of cramming. It is called 
the “crammig system” and I refuse to follow that cramming system in 
Hindu Code ; and I implore my hon. friend not to think of constituting 
any society — leave alone Hindu society — on the basis of — I have no other 
expression by which to call it — of cramming. 

To give an illustration from ordinary life there are among Vaidyas 
both learned and quacks. The learned vaidya never takes to rasa or 
pashan: they dread them. But a quack throws open his batua and 
immediately treats you with rasa and pashan, such as mercury and 
arsenic. I refuse to have this arsenic treatment from my hon. friend 
and I would beg of him not to apply the treatment to a society which 
has lived thousands of years with harmony. Looking at the history 
of the world you will see that the Hindu family or the Hindu home 
is the only happy home you find. There may be difficulties in some 
cases, they are bound to arise in a society of 30 crores of people. But 
the fact remains that you do not have here the horrible and tragic 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


924 


924 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

incidents that mar the social life of the West. I do not say that our 
society does not want changes, it does. Have changes by revolution 
or evolution as you like but let proper consideration be given to them 
before you launch on a legislation of this character. 

While talking of marriage under this Code, my hon. friend from 
Bihar, who is a jurist of eminence, stated that in marriage, the husband 
and wife are partners. I join issue with him on that. The Bill does 
not make them partners. If they were partners I would have little 
difficulty in accepting it. But the Law Minister is bringing contractual 
relations, thereby doing away with the sanctity of marriages enjoined 
by samskara. He is introducing contractual relationship of the Western 
type into our society and enforcing it in all its rigidity by means of 
registration. Are you going to have legislation for ‘haves’ or ‘have 
nots’ ? If you want to have legislation for ‘haves’ by all means have 
it with all your pleaders, vakils advocates, etc 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : ‘haves’ do you mean those who have 
wives ? 

Shri Biswanath Das : I am not concerned with them. You go to 
the mofussil. India lives in its villages and Indian life is village life. 
Barring the few upper class people, the rest of the people celebrate 
their marriages for ten, 15 or even less in some cases. You are now 
going to have registration departments with all their formalities, 
making it more expensive. 

I want to know from my hon. friend whether he has calculated what 
the expense under this head is going to be to the State. I record my 
strongest caveat in this regard against the Bills that have been thrust 
upon this House without any calculation of the expenditure that a 
Bill entails on State Treasury in its operation. I was a member of the 
old legislative council and I know that under the Devolution Rules 
it was a part of the business of the then irresponsible Government 
to calculate the financial implications of each Bill. I have a claim 
to ask my hon. friend to give us the financial implications of a Bill 
of this important nature and the expenditure it will involve on the 
State treasury. 

[Mr. Speaker in the Chair ] 

You are going to have your cases mostly decided by the district 
court, which means a higher court than the Munsiffs court. As a 
member I am being called upon to give my assent to this Bill. I have 
a right to know what is the money that I have to spend under each 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


925 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 925 

of the items. You are going to open registration department. You are 
going to have special marriage courts. I have a right to know what? 
you are spending now and what you propose to spend hereafter. It 
seems to me that the expense that the State would have to incur 
under this head would be unimaginable. Think of a population of 
33 crores. You can laugh 

Mr. Speaker : The hon. Member may address the Chair. 

Shri Biswanath Das : I am sorry, Sir. The Hon. Law Minister 
may laugh or others may laugh. I do not worry. But I claim that 
Government have the responsibility to place a working sheet before 
the House to show what they would have to spend to give effect 
to the various provisions of the Bill as used to be done by former 
Governments. Taking one per cent of the total population as people 
resorting to courts your country will be flooded with courts and 
registration departments. 

Mr. Speaker : May I point out that we are at present discussing 
clause 2 of the Bill which refers to the application of the Code. 
The point that the hon. Member seems to make relates to the cost 
to be incurred in the administration of the provisions of the Code. 
Could that not more appropriately be taken up when we consider 
the question of marriages ? In the clause where it is provided that 
marriages shall be registered this question will arise. This is not the 
stage of a general discussion of the entire Bill. We are at present 
at the clause by clause stage. Therefore, instead of interfering with 
the hon. Member’s speech now and then, I would request him to 
reserve his remarks till we come to the clause which provides for 
compulsory registration of marriages. 

Shri Biswanath Das : Sir, I thank you for the guidance you 
have given me, which I bear in mind. But I have also to make my 
submission in this regard. There are amendments to clause 2 to the 
effect that State legislatures may be given the option to give effect 
to the provisions of the Bill after it is passed into law. Therefore 
I submit the question of finance comes in prominently in various 
States. You have been good enough to refer to marriage. But it is 
not about marriage that you have to spend money 

Mr. Speaker : I referred to marriage because the hon. Member 
3PM was referring to it. It was only by way of illustration that 

I referred to it. The State Governments would be required 
to give effect only in case the amendment is carried. But assuming 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


926 


926 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

that that amendment is accepted, still effect will be given only to such 
provisions as are ultimately accepted by the House. So when we come 
to any provision which involves expenditure then it will be competent 
for the hon. member to advance that argument — not at this stage. That 
is what I was pointing out. 

Shri Biswanath Das : Thank you very much, Sir. I would not go 
further into it. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : May I make a submission, Sir, in 
this connection ? Under our new rules every legislation which involves 
any expenditure has to be presented to this House accompanied by an 
estimate of such expenditure. Therefore, perhaps my hon. friend was 
referring to those rules 

Mr. Speaker : There is nothing to be further discussed about it. It does 
not affect the point of relevancy. But I believe this Bill was introduced 
long before rule came into force. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes, Sir. And I can tell my friend that this Bill is 
going to be a revenue-paying measure. 

Mr. Speaker : That is another matter. We are not concerned with it. 

Shri Biswanath Das : My hon. friend says that this will be a revenue- 
paying measure 

Mr. Speaker : We need not go into that now. 

Shri Biswanath Das : Well my hon. friend claims the passage of this 
Bill and especially of this clause on the score that this is progressive. If 
it is so, I have no objection. If he convinces me that the legislation that 
he has adumbrated is progressive, I will certainly go with him. But I 
feel that it is as reactionary in certain respects as anyone could think 
of. I would in this connection invite my hon. friend’s attention to the 
Child Marriage Restrained Act, an Act which has been in existence for 
the last twenty years or more and is a dead letter. 

Several Hon. Members : No, no. 

Mr. Speaker : Let him proceed. That is his opinion. 

Dr. Ambedkar : His wrong opinion. 

Shri Biswanath Das : I will be glad if it is really “no” but my 
experience is otherwise. But what has my hon. friend the Law Minister 
done ? Whether the Child Marriage Restraint Act is dead or is alive, 
what has my hon. friend done with his show of progressiveness ? He 
has kept up and carried on the same age of marriage of 18. Why 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


927 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 927 

should you have the age of 18 ? I cannot see why he is so much 
enamoured of this 18. A boy to be put to married life and conjugal 
bliss in his eighteenth year is a thing unimaginable. I cannot think 
of it. I would appeal to him to consult his advisers of public health 
and ask whether such a course is desirable. Extend it to twenty or 
twenty-one years. If you really claim to be progressive, extend it. 
If you want to restrict, let the restriction be on justifiable grounds 
which will be for the well-being of the greatest number. That is why 
I claim that in certain respects the Bill is not at all progressive. In 
fact in ordinary instance you will not find people taking to married 
life at eighteen. Very few people do it. Therefore, the age limits of 
18 and 16 that you have fixed in the Bill to me look retrograde from 
the national point of view. (Interruption). 

Mr. Speaker : I must be very clear on this point that interruptions 
not only prolong the speeches but they add to the irrelevancies of the 
debate. I was again going to remind the hon. Member who is on his 
legs that he is going into questions which do not form the subject- 
matter of clause 2 or any of the amendments. He is now going into 
the age of marriage as if this is a general discussion on the Bill. I 
do not propose to allow any irrelevant discussion. We are taking the 
Bill clause by clause now; let us be strictly within the relevant scope 
of the clause. Otherwise we will never see the end of this legislation. 
I am not keen that it should be passed — it may be passed, it may 
not be passed — but at any rate I am keen to see that the debate on 
the clauses proceeds within the limits of relevancy and we go clause 
by clause to the end of the consideration. That is my point. I am 
not concerned one way or another. Therefore, the hon. Member will 
confine his remarks strictly to the provisions of clause 2 and the 
amendments thereto. 

Shri Biswanath Das : Sir, I am very thankful to you but my 
reference was necessitated by the fact that my Hon. Friend the Law 
Minister claimed in the course of his speech that his legislation is a 
progressive one. Therefore, I was forced to say that it is not, 

I have stated that the Code is intended for the “have-nots” and 
I have explained it. My objection to the clause is that the provisio 
to clause 2 is unnecessary and redundant. Unnecessary because it 
creates new complications and redundant because if anything is 
added without real necessity to the structure of the clause it creates 
further complications. Therefore, in any legislation such a redundancy 
is always given up. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 928 

928 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I fail to see why sub-clause (4) is being retained. I don’t mind the 
daughter having more than the son or the son getting more than 
the daughter. Let it be a matter between the daughter and the son. 
I for myself would not hesitate to accept Marumakkattayam law 
instead of accepting division of the family property into bits. That 
being so, if my hon. friend would propose to give all the property to 
the daughter I would not object. Let the women have it. In fact, in 
Malabar, the women are by inheritance having almost all the property. 
Therefore, you may do that or you can give the daughters and the 
sons equal rights : this is not a matter with which I am very much 
concerned. Speaking for myself. I have no daughter to claim any 
share from me, but I feel for the daughters in general. Now, if you 
add to the share that the daughter gets from her father’s house by 
sub-clause (4), it means that you add to the financial possibilities of 
the women. She gets her stridhan, her share of the property and also 
special facilities as provided in the Special Marriages Act of 1872. 
Therefore, the continuance of sub-clause (4) is, I think, unnecessary 
also, I believe, unwarranted. 

I feel that the time has come when something has to be done 
to change the social structures of India. That some has to be done 
with the concurrence of the people and the thinking sections of the 
society. Therefore, I appeal to the Treasury Benches and to you to 
see that Government remove the objectionable features of clause 2 
as also of the Bill, so that the Bill will have a smooth passage. 

*Shri M. A. Ayyangar : At no stage of the Bill hitherto have 
I had the good fortune to take part in the debate. You, Sir, were 
absent in the earlier stages and I had to take the chair. I have 
always tried to keep my opinions to myself, but the time has come 
when I should express my opinion regarding this matter. Let me 
first of all declare to the House and to the hon. the sponsor of this 
Bill that I am not wedded to whatever is ancient merely because it 
is ancient nor opposed to whatever is new simply because it is new. 
Merely because something is old, let us not cling to it; nor decry 
something that is new because it is new. It is up to us, as wise 
men, to consider both the pros and cons and accept what is good 
and reject what is bad. I shall try therefore quite dispassionately to 
go through some of the points that have been urged. I shall not go 
over the ground and make this a speech on the second reading of the 
Bill, but whatever is relevant in general I shall address myself to. 


P.D., Vol. VIII, Part II, 7th February 1951, pp. 2517-31. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


929 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 929 

I shall, first of all, try to dispose of some of the amendments that 
have been placed before the House and the objections that have been 
raised in regard to them by the sponsor of this Bill. It is said in one of 
the amendments that because this bill has far reaching consequences 
it must be only an enabling measure, it is said that option should 
be given to any individual to declare that he will be governed by the 
provisions of this Bill from the date of registration or declaration 
to this effect. The Hon. the Law Minister said that down from the 
earliest times when legislation was embarked upon in this country by 
the Britishers, there has been no precedent whatever for a measure 
being passed and option being given to any individual or class to 
accept or reject that measure by declaration. I am afraid his memory 
is too short. Now, let us take the Cutchi Memons Act of 1920. Indians 
who got converted to Islam were very often governed by the Hindu 
law, the law in which they were born. So the Cutchi memons had 
the joint family law and they also made adoptions among themselves. 
But later on it was urged by some reformers that the Shariat, i.e. 
the law of Islam, should apply to all persons embracing Islam. Islam 
has its own code of laws regulating inheritance, marriage, succession, 
divorce etc. The Hindu faith has attached to it its own law made by 
the smrithikaras relating to the same items which are also regulated 
by the Islamic law. For those persons who got converted to Islam, an 
enabling provision was made in this Act whereby any Cutchi Memon 
who wanted to adopt the Hindu law could by declaration before a 
prescribed authority do so; he could either ask to be governed by 
the Hindu law or by the customary law which prevailed before his 
conversion. 

Shri Raj Bahadur : That was a very special case. 

Shri M. A. Ayyangar : I would refer to a general case also. My 
friend should be a little patient. Under the Cutchi Memons Act, as 
amended in 1923, there are the following provisions : — 

“Any person who satisfies the prescribed authority — 

(a) that he is a Cutchi Memon and is the person whom he represents 

himself to be; 

(b) that he is competent to contract within the meaning of section 

II of the Indian Contract Act, 1872; and 

(c) that he is resident in British India 

may be declaration in the prescribed form and filed before the prescribed 

authority declare that he desires to obtain the benefit of this Act, and 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


930 


930 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

thereafter the declarant and all his minor children and their 

descendants shall in matters of succession and inheritance be governed 

by the Muhammadan law,” 

Now, the argument of my hon. friend Shri Raj Bahadur cuts his 
own case, because this was not a law intended for the whole of India 
but was a law specially to safeguard the interests of a particular 
community. This section is an enabling provision. Cutchi Memons are 
not the only Musalmans in this country. The majority of Musalmans 
far outweigh the Cutchi Memons. When 99.9 recurring per cent, 
of Muslims follow the Shariat, why should a special provision be 
made for the Cutchi Memons? Therefore, this interjection from my 
hon. friend, far from helping him, helps the other side. Even if 
there is one instance, it is enough. Now, is it possible for you to 
enforce Buddhism on me or for me to impose Hinduism on another 
man? This Jaw of inheritance, marriage, succession etc. is based 
upon the same tenets. But if a person who got himself converted 
wanted to be governed by the ancient law which prevailed before 
his conversion, he was given an option to change over to the other 
law. Though he got himself converted, he had to convert himself 
voluntarily to the new legal institutions, changing one from the 
other. There was no coercion whatever. But without the suggested 
amendment, this Bill will be a piece of legislation which is of a 
coercive nature, bringing various other persons into its fold. So far 
as Hindus are concerned, if you want to marry out of the ancient 
law, there is the Civil Marriage Act. It was originally intended to 
apply to persons who had to declare that they were neither Hindus 
nor Christians nor Jains nor Parsis. Later on, it was changed. No 
two Christians could marry unless they disavow their religion. 
No two Muslims could marry unless they disavow their religion 
under the Civil Marriage Act. But we are always progressive. We 
are selfdenying. We are all-embracing even to the point of self- 
destruction. We have amended this Act by saying that Hindus need 
not disavow their religion. Hindus, however they are married, may 
adopt the Civil Marriage Act. That is what we have done. What more 
is necessary ? Now you want to convert those people who follow the 
ancient law at the point of the byonet to your way of thinking. Why 
do you want me to change my religion? I have already quoted an 
instance where a special piece of legislation was made for the Cutchi 
Memons, a microscopic minority. It is because Dr. Ambedkar feels 
that a majority of us are archaic — to use the mildest word — that he 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


931 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 931 

has brought forward this piece of legislation. It won’t be wrong for 
me to say that he is still finding it difficult at the age of sixty to 
know to what faith he has to belong. But he is asking me to decide 
overnight that I should change. If I may raise my voice-let me not 
be misunderstood — I am as fit to be in the society as other members 
can claim to be. I am not ashamed of my religion. I am speaking not 
only to the men and women in this country but also to the outside 
world, that we have everything to be proud of the tenets by which we 
are governed and proud of the law that our ancients gave us. If only 
the other nations of the world followed our religion and the principles 
we have adumbrated there, there won’t be these constant wars and 
all would be peace and peaceful. We are always accustomed to adopt 
things which are found wanting in the western countries. A motor car 
which has been discarded in Europe becomes a model of a car here; 
an institution which has been discarded in the west becomes a model 
in our country. 

In 1937 we passed a law in this House that in the case of converts 
to Islam, their customary law according to Hindu system would 
prevail in regard to adoption etc. Similarly, in the South the Moplahs 
of Malabar had adopted certain of the Hindu customs, though they 
were Muslims. It is not even a question of adoption : they were born 
with such customs. Therefore, they followed one rule so far as their 
inheritance and succession was concerned and another rule so far as 
their faith was concerned. We passed in 1937 what was known as the 
Shariat Law. This is for all India and all Muslims. Section 3 of the 
Shariat Act says : 

(1) any person who satisfies the prescribed authority- (a) that 
he is a Muslim, (b) that he is competent to contract within the 
meaning of section 11 of the Indian Contract Act (IX of 1872), 
(c) that he is a resident of British India — may by declaration in 
prescribed form and filed before prescribed authority declare that 
he desires to obtain benefit of this Act and thereafter provisions 
of section 2 shall apply to the declarant and all his minor children 
and their descendants as if in addition to matters enumerated 
therein, adoption, wills and legacies were also specified. 

Therefore, there is absolutely nothing novel in my hon. friend Shri 
Jaspat Roy’s amendment. This is a measure which ought to be accepted 
cautiously. A majority of the community do not want this, and not only 
do they not want it, but also they are able to take care of themselves. Is 
this House particularly under the leadership of my hon. friend, entitled 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


932 


932 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to tell and advise people outside that what they are following is 
wrong and that they should change their method ? I am not basing 
my argument on the ground that this Parliament is not entitled to 
do that, though my personal view is that this Parliament cannot 
enact legislation in the way it was doing during the British days. 
We are now guided by a written Constitution. My own personal 
impression is that the personal matters of an individual, and the 
practice by which he is governed so far as his marital relationship 
is concerned are governed by his fundamental rights and should not 
be touched by anybody. So long as the practice which I follow and 
the procedure I adopt in regard to marriage is not opposed to public 
morality and is not obnoxious, or indecent, it is my own business 
and nobody has any right to interfere with it. Therefore, we have 
to go slow in this matter. 

So far as the progressive elements are concerned, we have made 
a number of enactments now. The Hindu Widow Remarriage Acts 
are there. My hon. friend referred to the Child Marriage Restraint 
Act. True, it has put down child marriages. But it has put down 
marriages also. Everywhere a new problem has arisen : there are 
armies of unmarried girls today, there will be no dearth of girls 
if only you want to enlist them in the army as nurses or doctors. 
This is a new problem that you have created — have you heard of it 
before ? Our friends, including Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava, cried 
hoarse, that by early marriage girls became widows. But is there any 
guarantee that a man will continue to live, the moment he marries 
a girl of fifteen. I do not think God in his wisdom has arranged 
that a man marrying a girl of fifteen will live long, and that a man 
marrying a girl less than fifteen would die early. Therefore nobody 
can stand guarantee on this matter. It is a question of balancing 
the convenience. 

We have not heard of any marriage except in the human kingdom. 
Animals don’t marry ; there is no law of divorce among them ; they 
don’t have family life. It is only with respect to human beings that 
the institution of marriage is prescribed as one of the purusharthas 
with a view to avoid inconvenience. As the Maharshi said, of the four 
purusharthas, the three, that is Moksha, the other word dharma, 
maintenance of society, and artha, politics or economics, depend upon 
a happy family life. This is one thing on which all our ancients laid 
emphasis, whereas in the Western society individualism has been 
all along in excelsis. Here family is the unit of our society. I do not 
mean to say that any human institution is so perfect as to obviate 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


933 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 933 

any inconvenience. So far as our marriage laws are concerned, no 
woman remains unmarried unless she chooses to remain a sanyasin. 
A Sanskrit sloka says that no woman is entitled to freedom. But it 
has been mis-understood. A woman is not born twenty five years 
old. She is born out of a mother’s womb, has to become an adult, 
marry and become old also. Both of them, whether a man or a 
woman, when they are in their teens are minors, have to be under 
the guiding hand of some other person. So long as the girl remains 
a minor the father has to maintain her. When she becomes old, is 
there any better person to look after her than her son ? Therefore 
at the dawn of life as well as at the close of life both man and 
woman depend upon the father or the son respectively. The only 
question is during converture. If God has created both man and 
woman, either the woman should go and live with the man or the 
man has to go and live with the woman. In a happy marriage the 
woman must live with the husband or the man must live with 
the wife. Is there a middle course ? I ask Dr. Ambedkar ( An hon. 
Member: they live together). Yes, both of them live together. That 
is what I am saying. Therefore either the man’s voice dominates 
in the House, or the woman’s. Let us assume there is a difference. 
If the man’s voice prevails there is no trouble. Or the man must 
get himself submerged in which case also there is no trouble. But 
if there is a difference between the man and the wife as to whom 
the girl should be given, when is the marriage to be celebrated ? I 
am only thinking aloud of the inconveniences. It is not as if man 
produces sons and woman produces daughters. In all seriousness 
I am addresing this House. What I am submitting to the House 
is this. Some people have misunderstood, merely because some of 
our sisters are going about with regard to their share and their 
sufferings — on account of the experiences that they possibly have 
had — and the corresponding chillness on the part of our friends 
here, that it is a woman’s Code. It is something like a husband 
and wife quarreling “to whom does this child belong ? “It is not 
either to the one or to the other. Therefore, If this Code emerges, 
it will belong both to the men and women of this country. Let us 
therefore look at it dispassionately. 

We have been brought up for three thousand years in a particular 
institution. I will presently quote a number of jurists who came from 
the West and who were attracted by the institutions that prevailed 
here. Some, of them even become converts and Max Muller created 
an ashram also. You have their opinions. They have compared their 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


934 


934 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

own institution with that which was prevailing in this country. 
They wanted to be converted but for their social habits and customs 
which weighed strongly with them. As they got enamoured of our 
institutions we are also now getting enamoured of their ways. 

Let us examine whether it is useful or not. Let us see what 
the authors, the Members of the Hindu Law Committee said. 
Mr. Rau himself said that this is a concurrent subject and as 
regards such of the chapters the Provinces may be left some voice 
as to whether this portion should be applied to this community or 
not. The territory to which it should be applied, whether it should 
be enacted at the present time or should be postponed all these are 
matters which any reformer, the sponsor of the Bill including, ought 
to take into consideration, so that there may be no impression let 
in the mind of any person that his conscience or religious faith or 
scruples have been trodden over. We have to gradually take people 
along. It is not as if we are declaring a war on Hindu religion. It 
is not an immediate question like deciding whether we should join 
America or not in declaring China as an aggressor. Here and there 
an inconvenience might have been felt by some people. I am asking 
this House, though you, Sir, to see the balance of convenience. It is 
not as if any human institution is perfect. 

Without going into details, taking the question of marriage, it is 
a proved fact that till the Sarda Act came into being, the majority 
of our women — 99 per cent of them — were married. Do you want to 
say, let women remain unmarried, let men remain unmarried, let 
there be children who have no parents — like forty thousand war 
babies to be taken care of by others ? Is it right for you to do so in 
our country ? You will be creating a new problem. Is it right ? So far 
either the man had to obey the voice of the woman or the woman 
had to subordinate her voice. Otherwise where is the house and the 
household ? That is exactly why the woman is not under the law. The 
modern woman who is educated in a foreign system, who has lost 
moorings in her own faith, wants that she should inherit the property 
of her father and not her husband. She is indifferent. She wants to 
have the money in her pocket and feel “Why should I be subordinate 
to a man ?” I know the difficulty in every household but if I am saying 
these things I am saying so with experience. Girls refuse to marry 
now because they feel “Why should I subordinate myself to a man ? 
Give me a portion of the property”. Does my daughter expect me to 
live perpetually ? It is not money alone that makes for happiness. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


935 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 935 

Suppose there is a rich man and his daughter inherits his property. 
When she is married does it prevent the other man to belabour 
her and to beat her ? What prevents him from doing that ? Many 
people speak supporting this Code. I am not referring to Members 
of Parliament — they know everything. I am only suggesting what 
many people outside are saying. Today under the Hindu Law the 
girl is not absolutely taboo. If a man dies leaving no children behind, 
the widow inherits the entire property. Apart from Deshmukh’s Act, 
under the ancient Hindu Law she is the heir of all the property of 
the husband in cases where there are no children. Secondly, if there 
is a daughter and the mother predeceases the father and there are 
no other children, she becomes the heir to the entire property. There 
is absolutely no difficulty. What is sought to be done here is that 
simultaneouly with the son the girl also must have a share. The 
responsibility of maintaining the household is that of the boy. We are 
not rich millionares. The zamindars have also been liquidated. Rajahs 
have gone. Only the middle class people are there. I am addressing 
myself only to them. There are the poorest people where both the 
husband and wife eke out their living by working as coolies. And 
what happens to the majority of middle class people ? The husband 
may be working as a clerk getting Rs. 100 or Rs. 200 a month. He 
educates his boy and expects that when he comes of the age of 21 or 
25 he would take charge of the family at a time when he is himself 
fifty of fifty-five. When he retires there are a number of children to 
be taken care of. The property that he has accumulated is so small. 
I know in my part of the country persons who have any holdings 
over five crores are only ten or five per cent, of the entire persons 
holding land. Land is the wealth in our country. There may be a few 
industrialists in Bombay and a few in Ahmedabad. But generally 
people have neither industry nor land. The only industry for a 
middle class man is to become a clerk and earn some money, and 
by the sweat of his labour he earns it. The responsibility of looking 
after the family is thrown upon that boy. He may get a small land 
or a thatched house as patrimony. The society expects him to take 
charge of his younger brothers and sisters and also to maintain the 
old parents. When the Britishers were ruling us the officials in the 
Railway Department, station-masters and others, used to get passes 
sometimes in the year to go round. The pass is for the family. I am 
sorry to note that the same practice is still continuing as regards 
the description of the family, namely that the family means himself, 
his wife and children. What about the old parents ? This may 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


936 


936 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

be in consonance with the western system where as soon as the boy 
comes of age he marries and goes away. The girl also marries and goes 
away. The old people have to be looking at each other’s face ! Do we 
want that kind of animal life in our country ? I have no quarrel with 
the rest. It is a misfortune that the individualism is in excelsis. The 
husband and the wife are one unit and they ought to protect the old 
people. Our joint family system was brought about by our ancients many 
years ago and that is a natural unit and there the father, mother, the 
son and grandson all of them go together. I say that this is a happy 
unit where unemployment never existed. People who talk of socialism 
and communism pay lip sympathy and I say that this tendency is the 
germ of Socialism. The husband in a particular family works for the 
maintenance of his own children on the one side and for the maintenance 
of the older people on the other side. 

In Madras after this marriage -divorce law was passed 38 applications 
were filed, (interruption) Boys alone can marry and no girl can marry a 
boy. Out of these 38 applications for divorce, 30 applications were filed 
only by the husbands. 

The Deputy Minister of Food and Agriculture (Shri Tirumala 
Rao) : Are they from the middle-class ? 

Shri M. A. Ayyangar : Most of them were from middle-classes, most 
of them were educated men, unfortunately in western style. As I said, 
the majority of the petitions were from husbands. I think there was 
only one case where a woman was said to be sterile. I would bring that 
under this Code. One other case was the husband, an educated lawyer 
and he is employed in Bombay. He gets Rs. 100 as salary. The girl is 
employed somewhere as a Doctor getting Rs. 400. The girl wants the 
husband and the husband wants the wife. The only pull was that the 
wife wants the husband to come and live with her and the husband 
wants the wife to come and live with him. After marriage this trouble 
has been going on between the husaband and wife for three years. The 
husband said : “How long am I to be without her company” and the 
Court found that it was a case of desertion by the girl and they dissolved 
this marriage. I ask all my sisters here present and others outside, in a 
widow re-marriage after the husband’s death nobody knows whether the 
man has not touched the woman before her re-marriage. Even after this 
the widow-re-marriage has not progressed considerably. (Interruption). 
My friend says that what I say is a lecture. What my friend says is 
all truth. The Widow re-marriage Act was passed long ago but still it 
requires a lot of persuasion. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


937 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 937 

There was an hon. Member of the Assembly — he was a Member 
from Bengal — and he brought a single clause Bill which stated that 
no widower shall marry a spinster. His idea was that a widower may 
marry at least some widows and when some of our friends pooh- 
poohed the idea, he withdrew the Bill and said that he committed 
a mistake. When once a man has learnt that a woman has been 
divorced, would that woman be touched as a wife and married again 
as a wife ? I do not want the society to be disrupted in that manner 
to suit the few conveniences here and there of some individuals. 
There are difficulties but the other difficulty is far more appalling 
than this difficulty. 

I was told this morning that some delegation is coming from 
Pakistan for the purpose of recovering abducted women. Have you 
ever heard of an ‘abducted man’ ? Nature has so made us that 
without the husband and the wife, there is no unity in this world. 
Even among the Patagonians the wife is as tall as the husband. In 
any other community the male is taller than the woman. Is it good 
if I talk like a woman with a squealish voice and a woman goes 
on talking like a man. Therefore I must be a man and a woman 
must be a woman. I see I am evoking laughter of my friends but I 
feel that God has made the best arrangement by creating a happy 
family in which the parents will be protected, the minor children 
will be protected. The affection is not as a result of wealth. Love 
and affection must flow of its own and it does not depend upon 
money at all. Most of us are poor and we marry and get a son and 
in our old age he takes charge of the management of the household 
and we feel that since we have discharged the responsibility to the 
aged parents, similarly he will maintain us in our old age. Sanction 
has the mighty force. That old law has much greater sanction than 
any other law which has prevailed so far for the last 3,000 years. 

When I become a member of parliament you do not allow me to sit 
here unless I take the oath of allegiance, but so far as this marriage 
is concerned, I ask you all, are you to displace these old customs 
such as taking hold of a woman, taking her hand and placing her 
feet upon straw and saying that “our hearts are placed together like 
the Ganges and Jamuna” ? This is not such a drab affair. Is it for 
the purpose of conjugal facility that a man is marrying and a woman 
is marrying ? Our ancient scriptures enjoined it for the purpose of 
a happy married life and for the purpose of a good progeny. It is 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


938 


938 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

not open to me to leave a legacy of blind, lame and dumb children to 
the rest of the community and ask them to take charge of them. Even 
among race-horses we talk of pedigree and for humanity alone any man 
can marry any woman and still expect the children to be perfect angles. 
The new marriage that is proposed will be like tying a race-horse to a 
lame donkey. 

Jayaswal an able commentator of Hindu Law said that our ancients 
had big herds of cattle and they were also anxious to have first-class 
progeny so that they may take charge of the rest of the community. 
That is an honoured practice of our country. Hitler also wanted a good 
progeny for his country. Even Mussolini got a number of marriages 
celebrated in his country. 

We say in or Sastras : “Aputrasya gathirnashthi” ; “Punnamno 
Narakadyasmath thrayathe pithatram suthah”. That is, the son saves 
the father from the Naraka called puth. It is that sanction that has 
produced a lot of children in our country. Otherwise, we would have 
had to give a hundred pounds to every mother to get children. Are we 
to pooh-pooh this culture ? What makes me say all this is that it is 
unfortunate that the Chairman of the Rau Committee is a gentleman 
who did not marry according to the Hindu law, Many of the Members 
of the Select Committee were not married according to the Hindu Law ; 
some were bachelors who did not marry at all. 

Shri Kesava Rao (Madras) : Who says that they were not married ? 

Mr. Speaker : Order, order. I think we are having this discussion a 
little beyond scope. 

Shri M. A. Ayyangar : I will come within the scope of the Bill. 

Mr. Speaker : He has already taken more than 35 minutes ; I am 
afraid it is rather too long. He may be short and to the point. 

Shri M. A. Ayyangar : I am only referring 

Shri Thirumala Rao : The reference is too personal with regard to 
the personnel of the Committee. 

Shri M. A. Ayyangar : After all, let it not be said outside that 
that is quality opinion ; it is only a question of personal opinion. 
I am as much aggrieved about this. Am I to bow down when it is 
said of the Smritikartas that they had absolutely no business to go 
on changing the smritis ? What else are we doing ? We are passing 
a law in the morning ; we are amending it in the afternoon. The 
smritikartas wanted to change the smritis according to the changed 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


939 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 939 

circumstances. They are tabooed as archaic persons. If they have 
changed, they are equally condemned for having changed. Why are 
there so many smritis ? Each is addressed to particular branch of 
law. My point is this. The reverence that is due in a change of law 
of this magnitude is not there. We are looking at the question from 
a different point of view. I submit that by means of this legislation 
Hindu society is cut vertically, horizontally, diagonally, into bits 
and bits. You say, let a man say, “I do not belong to Hinduism”. 
Even the wording “professing the Hindu religion” is obnoxious. Why 
do you call yourself a Hindu ? What is there in Hinduism ? There 
are certain things ; there is the doctrine of Karma which even the 
Buddha and the Jaina believed. The Vedas are not peculiar to 
me. I believe in the hoary antiquity of the Vedas as an inspired 
document. Do not the Muslims believe that there is a Veda. Even 
the Sikhs who belong to a reformist religion, worship a Book. Why 
should I be ashamed of my Vedas and of calling myself a Hindu ? 
Whether I am a Brahmo samajin, or arya Samajam or a Vaishnav, 
if I do not believe in the Vedas, I am not a Hindu. 

Unfortunately, in this country, religion has entered into politics 
also. It is said that on account of these vicissitudes of castes and 
creeds, so many Muslims became converts. I ask, was there not one 
religion in China, Buddhism; was there not one religion in Indonesia, 
Buddhism ? Where is Buddhism in Indonesia today : Where is 
Buddhism in Malaya? Were not a number of people converted to 
Islam in China ? Again and again, wherever there is any difficulty 
you attack Hinduism and say that it is this ancient system that 
is responsible for all this. I say, the remedy is elsewhere. Apart 
from its disadvantages, it is the Hindu system of marriage and 
not allowing a divorce, of property not being dissipated by division 
amongst daughters also, who have no responsibility to maintain 
the family, etc., that has been the source of strength to the people. 
I would ask a simple question. If the daughter gets married, do 
you ask me to live with my son or my son-in-law ? It is said : 
u Jamatha dasamo grahah” , the son-in-law is the tenth planet. I 
must be supported by somebody in my old age. Why not live with 
the son instead of the son-in-law ? What happens if you give a 
share to the daughter ? Of course, she will say, “Come and live 
with me”. But, my fate will be that of King Lear. I am appealing 
to all mothers and sisters to anxiously and seriously consider the 
situation. Let them not be under the impression that I have not 
consulted my partner at home. We have deliberated for a long time. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


940 


940 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

In these circumstances, I say, let us go slowly. Whoever wants to 
have liberal views, let him have his own way of life. Incidentally, 
I may say that sati is opposed to morality ; that was rightly put 
down. You say this is an enabling provision. Why don’t you say 
that a brother may marry a sister ? That would also be an enabling 
provision. Up to certain limits we can go ; beyond limits, we ought 
not to go. We should not allow incest. The question is whether the 
marriage should be beyond three degress or seven degrees. I have 
also read some books on genetics. New things are being discovered. 
They say there are three kinds of blood and that one does not agree 
with another. I have also read astrology in the old school. They 
say that before marriage you must consult the Rajju, Sarpa, and 
Gana agreement. This Gana seems to have been discovered by the 
westerners. The late Dr. Rabindranath Tagore was a great poet; 
but we recognised him as a great poet only after the westerners 
recognised him. Similarly we want somebody from the west to come 
and say that marriages should be only of a particular order and that 
the points in the old smritis are very good. I am a conservative in 
the sense that I do not want to leap before, I know that the other 
ground is steady and strong I would only urge upon this House to 
stick on to whatever has endured you for such a long time. 

Before I finish, I would like to refer to one other aspect of 
the question, that is the Marumakkattayam law. They are all 
intellectuals ; practically in the Secretariat, every Secretary is a 
Menon, coming from Malabar. I am proud of them. They have got 
a different way of life. Ask them if they are more happy. Why don’t 
you impose this law on them also ? Take the Aliyasanthana Law. 
You may think that it is opposed to all nature, where a man visits 
his wife and the wife remains in her .house, where the children are 
maintained by the mother and her brother, not by himself. To you it 
may appear strange. Natural affection is different. Would I embrace 
my sister’s sons with more affection, then my own ? Well that is 
their law and we are allowing them to continue under this law. 
But, when my hon. friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava says that 
there are certain customs in the Punjab, you say that they should 
be thrown overboard because my hon. friend is not so vociferous. 
After all, it is a wrong principle of jurisprudence. Law does not go 
in advance of custom. It is a human institution. It is something 
like saying that grammer does not go in advance of language. A 
child learns to speak first and then comes in grammer. It is a 
wrong principle of jurisprudence to say that custom is a wrong 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


941 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 941 

thing. It is said that a custom, to have the validity of a custom, 
must be ancient, must be moral, must be definite, etc. These are 
principles under which customs will be recognised in courts of law. 
I say it is wrong to say that, notwithstanding the validity of any 
established practice, we abrogate that because we have come to a 
different conclusion. What right have you to say so ? It is not that 
I am questioning the competence of this Parliament to go into this 
matter. I am only saying to my Hon. Friend, let him not force this 
law on the community. It may become a dead letter. Let the people 
come forward and ask for these reforms. I would like to have statistics 
as to how many persons have married under the Civil Marriages Act. 
We may call the people ignorant; after all, time will judge whether 
they are ignorant. Therefore, I would appeal to hon. Members not 
to jump before you are sure of the ground Let us have 
piece-meal legislations. We had the Widow Re-marriage 
Act. We had the Act to give women the power to inherit property. 
We had the Act to restrain child marriages and so on. Therefore, I 
say, let us wait and see. Let us go slow. Noting will be lost thereby. 
Nothing will be lost because we do not allow divorce. Allow it to 
those who want a divorce. Let those who have solemised their 
marriages under the civil authority, to jointly make a declaration 
that they will be governed by the Civil Marriage Act. If there 
is a volume of opinion against a measure, let us try to change 
that volume of opinion. Let hon. Members consider the question 
coolly and deliberately. Let us not displace the existing system 
merely because something is novel or strange so that you may go 
with the rest of the universe. We understand what is meant by 
Christianity. Germany is a Christian country, but were there no 
fightings in Germany ? Do not Christians fight with each other ? 
How can we say that because of castes and creeds in our country 
the nation went down to the Greeks ? Why give a platform and a 
point to every other man to abuse us ? We have progressed, and 
progressed considerably. In Switzerland, they say no woman has a 
vote. Then why not our women go there and ask them to demand 
votes ? There is no use giving a lurid picture of our society and of 
our women. Our women have produced Sitas and Savitris. They 
followed their husbands. Perhaps we have now to follow our wives. 
Let them write our Puranas and say that men should follow their 
wives, if that would bring domestic peace. To-day we are husband 
and wife. To-morrow I go to a cinema and see a woman well made 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 942 

942 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

up with powered face and all that. Am I to come home and beat my 
wife, just because she is not as pretty as the one I saw in the picture ? 
And the next day, am I to apply for a divorce ? No. Woman is the 
weaker sex. Perhaps they may quarrel with me for saying so. But you 
cannot get rid of these institutions unless you pray to God to have 
only women in the world or only men. These institutions are very 
necessary. They are necessary for the proper balancing of domestic 
life. They are necessary in the interest of economy in the interest of 
solidarity and in the interest of avoiding unemployment and in so 
many other interests. If the husband dies, there is the brother-in-law 
to take care of the widow. We have also the maintenance laws to 
give at least a temporary strength to the widow, to stand by herself. 
I am only opposing those ladies who want to take away a chunk of 
their father’s property and leave the husband alone. May God save 
us from them and from having an army of unmarried women. 

Shri T. N. Singh (Uttar Pradesh) : Sir, I have an amendment 
in my name. 

Mr. Speaker : All those who have tabled amendments and others 
also will get a chance. 

*Shri Raj Bahadur : I have listened very patiently to the speeches 
of the hon. Members who have spoken before me, although I raised 
certain pertinent questions for them to throw light upon. [I find 
myself in complete agreement with the provisions of this Bill.] And 
my support is based not on any misplaced ethusiasm or the rashness 
of youth, but because I feel that this measure is necessary because 
of the exigencies of the moment and the situation created by the 
attainment of independence by our country. I feel that unless we 
have a measure of this kind and keep peace with the times, we are 
bound to fail. 

It is well known that perhaps during the last three years no other 
Bill or legislative measure has provoked so much controversy as the 
Hindu Code Bill, and passion, prejudice, sentiment and superstition 
have all come in to cloud our judgments. It is a little difficult in an 
atmosphere so surcharged with superstiton and suspicion for the 
country and also for this House to come to a balanced conclusion, a 
balanced judgment on the merits and demerits of the Bill. 

The critics of the measure can be divided into three categories. 
First of all there are the people who like the Hon. Deputy- Speaker 
genuinely and sincerely feel that we are definitely marching ahead 


P.D., Vol. VIII. Part II, 7th February 1951, pp. 2532-36. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


943 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 943 

of the time and the adoption of a measure of this kind would do us 
harm, that it would harm Hindu society which would be irreparable. 
Then there are others who day in and day out criticise those who 
are responsible for this measure, and to them what matters is not 
what is being said, but who says it. These people have clouded the 
judgments of the masses also. It is well known that our masses are 
ignorant and they are tossed violently between these two extremes. 
It is also well known that when a country attains Independence, 
there is a natural desire felt by the people to have uniform laws and 
to codify their existing laws. This has synchronised with national 
awakening. This is not the first time that such a desire has been 
expressed by the Indian people, through their representatives in the 
Legislature. As early as 1921 there was a resolution to that effect 
by a Member from the Central Provinces. Shri K. J. Bagde and 
Sir Tej Bahadur Sapru was the then Law Member. The resolution 
was to the effect that all the various branches of the Hindu Law 
as then existing should be properly codified. From time to time this 
question was also raised in the Central Legislature and I find that 
as eminent a person as Shri Ganganath Jha has put a question 
on the floor of the House asking when the codification of Hindu 
Law would take place. We may note that that was also a period 
of national awakening and this desire to codify the law was being 
voiced at that time. 

The option has been expressed that this Code should be made 
applicable to non-Hindus also, to Christians and Muslims and 
others also that there should be a common Civil Code. Articles in 
the Constitution have been referred to and it has been said that 
this Code violates some of those articles. But I am sure when the 
Civil Code comes up for consideration, these very same persons 
would come forward to say that this Civil Code violates article 44 
which guarantees the liberty of thought or religion. That will be the 
objection raised, of that I have no doubt in my mind. The demand 
for a Civil Code, seems to be bogus and without any meaning. 

If we apply our minds to the present condition of Hindu society we 
will find that there are various differences and divisions in various 
matters, in the matter of marriage, of adoption, of succession and soon. 
It is impossible for the country to make any progress unless there is 
some codification of these various laws. So far as other sections of 
society are concerned they have this in some measure. For instance, 
Christian and Muslim women have some rights and privileges which. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


944 


944 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

are sought to be given to Hindu women by this Code. Christian and 
Muslim women are now entitled in some measure to the right of 
inheritance. In the case of Muslim women, divorce is also obtainable 
to them. 

An Hon. Member : No. 

Shri Tyagi : It is not a right but a liability. 

Shri Raj Bahadur : You may call it a liability but I would request 
you to apply your mind to the provisions of the Bill. There are many 
instances where a Hindu has deserted his wife for more than five 
years. Hindus have changed their religion and there are instances 
where Hindus keep other women while their first spouse is living. In 
such cases of immorality will you not come out with your galantry or 
chivalry and allow divorce to such miserable Hindu sisters ? The right 
has been given to a Hindu male to marry four or five times. If the 
sanctity of marriage is there it should be for both man and woman. If 
a woman is expected to be pure, chaste and faithful to the husband, is 
it not for the man also to bind himself by the same obligation ? Why 
should it be one-sided. If we say that man is God’s favourite creature, 
it will not help our society or country in any way. 

Let us look at it from another angle. In the present state of the world 
whenever there is a threat to the frontiers of a country and there is 
a war, it is not fought on the old lines. It is a total war. In the last 
great war while British men went to the trenches and the firing line, 
British women folk applied themselves to the various tasks of national 
responsibility. For example, they ran railways, worked on the buses and 
in ammunition factories. Unfortunately it is a fact that we regard woman 
as a liability, as something which is below ourselves. The common man’s 
conception of a woman is that she is like the shoes on our feet. If they 
are torn we can throw them away and take a new pair. 

An Hon. Member : Is that the conception in Rajasthan ? 

Shri Raj Bahadur : That is so not only in Rajasthan but in most 
of our rural areas. It is so in high families also. It is time that we 
realise the bitter truth. It is time that we recognise it if we want to 
shoulder the responsibilities that have devolved upon us as a result 
of our independence. If we want to make our home and this country 
Bharat Varsh secure we should have to see that our women folk are 
brought on a par with man. It is not Westernism or Modernism but 
the exigencies of the moment that require it. You cannot face all the 
threats to your security as a nation unless you radically change our 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


945 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 945 

attitude towards the women of our country. It is impossible to go ahead 
with the task of reorganisation of our country unless and until our 
women get the same status as man in our society and it is a patent 
fact that today that status is not granted to them. Unless and until 
the law that is there is codified and brought within the reach of the 
common man it will be impossible for our people to be unified. 

May I in this connection refer in passing to the difficulties that we 
are experiencing today ? Our law has been what the British Judges 
in the Privy Council have interpreted till now. It is a well known fact 
that conflicting judgments exist on the same points. For example you 
can cite many contradictory rulings on either side. Apart from that 
the law as it exists today is only within the reach of experts, lawyers 
or judges and the common man does not know what the law is. Is it 
not good that by codifying the law and making it more rational by 
modifying it to the extent desirable, we may make the law within easy 
reach of the people ? Otherwise our progress towards unification and 
solidarity will be impossible. 

The question before us is not whether we should codify. Even the 
bitterest opponents of codification have veered round to the opinion 
that codification is necessary. How far should we codify it, is the 
question. There are only three or four points which have aroused bitter 
controversy 

An Hon. Member : This is not a general discussion. 

Shri Raj Bahadur : It is a discussion on the points hon. Members 
have made that the whole Code should be made applicable to the 
entire nation. 

Bitter controversy has raged firstly about divorce and marriage 
laws and secondly about inheritance. I will confine myself to these 
two important points. I would say that the provisions of the Bill and 
the latest amendments proposed by the Hon. Law Minister may be 
modified to a certain extent, if we find that we cannot go whole hog. 
But so far as the basic principle of divorce is concerned we shall have 
to recognise it. 

I might give you an example. If a man happens to convert himself to 
Islam or any other religion, at the present time his wife and children 
are also compelled to do so. Is it not necessary that at least in such 
cases our women folk should be allowed to remain within the Hindu 
fold ? Can anybody object in principle to divorce being allowed in such 
cases ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


946 


946 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

So far as inheritance is concerned I am not in favour of allowing the 
daughter any share after her marriage in the father’s property. But if 
she is unmarried she must be allowed the same as her brother. That 
is an amendment which would meet the viewpoint of my learned friend 
Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava. 

In conclusion, I would say that so far as the opposition to the Bill is 
concerned it has made out of certain political considerations also. The 
elections are looming large on the horizon and people consider any stick 
good enough to beat the Congress with. People outside the Congress are 
trying to whip up passion against the measure just because the elections 
are coming. They want to use it as a weapon in the election fight. It 
is therefore meet and proper that we should consider each provision of 
the Bill as coolly as possible, thrash out every issue threadbare, so that 
people may be able to see the Code in the proper light without the mist 
that now surrounds it. It is obvious that when we come to the clause 
by clause discussion, most of the superstitions and suspicions will be 
removed and controversial matters may be settled by mutual agreement 
and nothing will be there which will offend public conscience and public 
morality. 

With these words, Sir, I oppose the amendments moved and support 
the clause 

[Mr. Deputy- Speaker in the Chair.] 

Seth Govind Das (Madhya Pradesh) : First of all I want to say that 
it would have been very good if 

Shri Hussain Imam (Bihar) : On a point of information, Sir; Will 
the Hon. Minister of Works, Production and Supply, who is now here, 
tell the House about the tragedy of the Delhi clock tower ? The Delhi 
clock tower has fallen. 

Some Hon. Members : This is not the time. 

Seth Govind Das : You can ask that after the speech, not in the 
middle of it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is possible some hon. Members are anxious 
to know what has happened. If the Hon. Minister has any statement to 
make he may do so after Seth Govind Das concludes his speech and we 
shall have an opportunity of having more information about the tragedy. 

The Minister of Works, Production and Supply (Shri 
Gadgil) : I have learnt about it only an hour ago. Secondly, I am not 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 947 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 947 

administratively responsible for what has happened in Delhi. 
The property known as the clock tower is managed by the Delhi 
Administration and probably by the Delhi Municipal Committee. 
But if it is the desire of the House that it should know some facts 
I shall try to contact the proper authority and at about five I may 
be able to give some information. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Yes. The hon. Member may continue his 
speech. 

*Seth Govind Das : * (English translation of the Hindi speech) 
Sir, I was submitting that it would have been very good if the Hon. 
Minister has not introduced this Bill at the present time. When I 
say this, it should not be inferred that I want to stick to the old 
customs or want to follow all that is given in our Smrities and 
Vedas. I have some knowledge of Sanskrit and I love my Indian 
culture, therefore, as far as Smrities and Vedas are concerned, 
they are not of the same opinion on every subject. If one Veda or 
Smriti says one thing regarding a particular subject another veda 
or Smriti says another thing regarding the same. We have always 
been lover of knowledge. Knowledge has always been given first 
place in our history and culture. We have admitted the fact that 
Kalabheden dharma bhedah i.e. Religion changes according to times. 
I admit that we need reforms and reforms should also be brought 
about through legislations. I remember the days when Raja Ram 
Mohan Ray pleaded the case for the abolition of sati. Even in those 
days there were people in the country who were in favour of Sati 
custom. I also remember those days when Iswarchandra Vidyasagar 
advocated the cause of widow remarriage and it was strongly 
opposed. Enough has been said regarding Sharda Act. I admit that 
child marriages have been prevented to a large extent due to the 
Sharda Act and to a greater extent this Sharda Act has tried to put 
an end to this bad custom of ours. Therefore, I admit that we have 
always been rational in our outlook. We should not follow the Vedas 
and Smrities blindly and we need laws to reform our society. But I 
could not understand one thing which our Minister said yesterday. 
He laughed at those persons who suggested that this Bill should be 
made applicable to the entire society as a whole. If we want to get 
our different societies knit in such a way, if we want to create such 
a society where there should be no class or caste distinction or so 
much difference as at present, then I submit that we need such a law 


P. D., Vol. VII, Part II, 7th February 1951, pp. 2545-49. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


948 


948 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

which may be applicable to the entire society without any distinction. 
Yesterday, the Hon. Minister made certain observations which in my 
opinion do not befit him, it is just possible that I may be wrong. I 
thought that he became somewhat irritated and lost his temper or 
he felt that we were putting obstruction in the passage of the Bill. 
But this is not the thing. This is the opinion of the most of the 
people, and I am one of them, that it would have been far better 
had this law been made applicable to the entire society without 
distinction. According to the Hon. Minister, it will be a matter of 
great pleasure if such a Bill could be introduced within two days. 
It will be very good if this Bill could be got passed within half an 
hour. It was not a good thing for our Hon. Minister, holding such a 
responsible post, to laugh at those people who hold different opinions 
than what he holds. It has been clearly stated in our Constitution, 
it may not be in the chapter relating to fundamental rights but it 
is in the preamble chapter: 

“That State shall endeavour to secure for the citizens a uniform Civil 

Code throughout the territory of India.” 

It has been clearly stated in our Constitution. The Bill which has 
been presented before us today is opposed to this clause. We have 
suffered a lot as a result of this class and caste distinctions. After 
attaining independence, we framed our Constitution and this is the 
first social Bill which has been presented before us after the passing 
of the Constitution. We should have incorporated some of the ideals 
in this social Bill and that could have been easily done., if only this 
was to be applied to the entire society. If some clauses of this Bill 
are deleted and the good ones selected then a Bill could be prepared 
which could be applied to the entire society as a whole. Then, the 
people who are opposing this Bill today would not have done so. 

There is one thing more and which is quite apparent. There are 
many good things in this Bill as well. I would rather say that it 
abounds in good things and the points of disagreement are very few. 
There is one important point in the fundamental things, which have 
been laid down in this Bill. One of the disputed points is that women 
should also be given the right of succession to property. It is easy to say 
a thing as my friend Shri Syamanandan Sahaya has done, I hold him 
in great esteem, by declaring that we already treat women as masters 
of our household. I would like to tell him that that is akin to the 
maxim “the safe is yours but let the keys remain with me.” We have 
seen and are aware of the consequence’s resulting from non-existence 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


949 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 949 

of the rights of women to property. We know of the lives that many 
women had to lead. Will Shri Syamanandan Sahaya or those who 
are of his opinion deny the fact that many a chaste and respectable 
women belonging to wealthy families had to lose their prestige and 
status on account of having been left without property ? As far as I am 
concerned, I have, therefore, no difference of opinion about women’s 
right of succession to property. The question is whether they should 
obtain share in the father’s property or in the father-in-law’s. 

Giani G. S. Musafir (Punjab) : There is no objection to father-in- 
law’s. 

Seth Govind Das : So this is a big question. Today our system of 
marriage is such that the woman goes to her husband’s place. There 
was also a time when there existed no system of marriage in the 
society. The story of Uddalak and Shwetketu in the Mahabharata 
clearly shows that there was a time when no marriage were held. 
Then came a period of matriarchy, where the husband used to go to 
the wife’s place and the female child among their children inherited 
the property. That system still prevails in some places, in Malabar 
for example. Then the period of patriarchy came. Most of our social 
structure today comprises of patriarchy, not matriarchy, and how far 
would it be proper to make a woman inheritor of father’s ‘property 
in such society is a controversial matter. I would like to impress that 
so far as the women’s right of succession to property is concerned 
that must be there, but that should exist in such a manner that an 
unmarried woman should be entitled to it at her father’s place and 
a married one at her husband’s. 

There are also some other clauses of this Bill about which there 
may be a difference of opinion. So far as this Bill is concerned. 
It incorporates two things. First, various existing laws have been 
emalgamated. Secondly, some clauses for the purpose of social reform 
have been added. As I had just said, it would have been in the fitness 
of things had this Bill not come up. When our President Dr. Rajendra 
Prasad was the President of the Congress, he had pleaded for not 
presenting such a Bill and so according to him it had better not come 
up. But now it has been carried so far that if it is withdrawn at this 
juncture, various interpretations shall be forthcoming for that. The 
next election is before the people. I do not give very much importance 
to the elections and believe that the Congress is not so ineffectual that 
if the present Bill is passed and people are told that the Congress has 
done it, the Congress Party would be defeated. But if the Congress 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


950 


950 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is such a trifle that it can thus be defeated. I would say that the 
earlier it is defeated the better. So I differ from those who keep 
the elections before them and proceed with that point in view. 
I have recollections of 1923 and 1926 when the Swarajya Party 
went to polls for the first time. I was a candidate for the Central 
Assembly from the Zamindar party and it was being said that the 
Congress and zamindars were far apart, that zamindars would not 
vote with the Congress; but still nobody contested my seat. After 
that I stood again for the Council of State in 1925 and then too 
it was doubted whether the voters of the Council of State would 
vote for the Congress. Sir Manekji Dadabhai and Sir Hari Singh 
Gour opposed me, but I got three-fourth of the votes. Therefore, 
I do not consider the Congress to be a touch-me-not institution 
which may wane into a defeat if we pass such a Bill, which thought 
may continue to give us a constant fear of elections. I am of the 
opinion that if we are in favour of this Bill and if our leader, our 
Prime Minister, considers that it should be passed, it would be a 
mistake for us not to pass it for fear of elections. It is a different 
thing if we do not want to pass it. But if we do not pass it for 
fear of elections, there would be nothing worse than that. And I 
would say a word to those also who would not like to see it go 
through for fear of elections. If the Bill is not passed now, they 
shall find people saying that if the Congressmen were returned 
they would do such things as were not there even in the Bill. 
Such horrid pictures would be drawn before the people the like 
of which we cannot even imagine today. So we have not to deal 
with this Bill for consideration or fear of election. We have to deal 
with it on its merits. In this connection, I would reiterate before 
the Hon Minister what I have just said, namely, that the Bill has 
two parts — one of amalgamation and the other of social reforms. 
We are utterly opposed to many provisions of social reforms. I 
want that under the prevailing circumstances in the country all 
such provisions should be left out because their incorporation is 
inopportune. Things over which there is divergence of opinion should 
be excluded and those of amalgamation may be taken up. I make 
considerable distinction between these two things and wish the 
Hon. Minister to give sufficient heed to this suggestion of mine. 
I want that so far as amalgamation is concerned we should take 
that up as also the provisions with which we are not at variance 
and these provisions may be passed. Those provisions that are 
controversial and with regard to which there is going on a campaign 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 951 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 951 

in the country should be left out. We must let the next election 
take place when representatives would be elected on adult franchise. 
If at that time we think it necessary to bring up the provisions 
concerning social reforms, we may move them as amendments to 
this present Bill and pass them. Such an approach will cover both 
the things. It would bring about an amalgamation of the laws and 
with that we would also avoid the controversial points. 

One thing more should be done. As my friend Shri Jaspat Roy 
Kapoor said, its application should not be made obligatory on all 
people. Of course, such social reforms should be brought about 
through legislation ; but it is imperative to mould public opinion 
in their favour. It would not be ill-advised to make it applicable 
only over those who accept it and not try to make it binding on 
the entire population. Therefore, I would again submit that it 
were better for this Bill not to have come up before us at all. 
I am also of the opinion that in keeping with the ideals of our 
Constitution if we could make this Bill in the times to come 
applicable to the entire society, according to the amendments 
moved by Shri Jaspat Roy Kapoor or others we must endeavour 
to make it such. Along with this we should also endeavour not 
to make it applicable compulsorily over the people. It may be 
applied to those people only who accept it, or else in the existing 
conditions we may leave out its controversial portions and so far 
as the matter of amalgamation goes, we may do it in as much as 
we are unanimous about it. 

*Shri Hussain Imam : Sir, today I also want to speak in my 
own language as our Seth Govind Das has delivered a good speech.” 

Prof. Ranga : Why not speak in English, so that we may follow ? 

Shri Hussain Imam : In considering the Hindu Code Bill, 
ordinarily, I would not have taken part in the debate, because it 
is a measure applicable to my sister community and as such they 
should have the right to have whatever they wish for themselves. 

Shri Tyagi (Uttar Pradesh): But the amendment covers you. 

Shri Hussain Imam : That is the reason for my rising to speak. 
Some of my hon. friends are anxious to bring us under the purview 
of this measure. Well, there would have been no objection on our 


P.D., Vol. VIII, Part II, 7th February 1951, pp. 2550-55. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


952 


952 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

part to come under a common code had it been in advance of our 
own system. But my complaint is that it is very much backward ; 
and you want to draw up and bring us down to the level to which 
you have brought yourself down. I, therefore, wish to be excused 
from coming down to your level. 

I may mention that the Hindu Code Bill has a very long history 
behind it. At one stage of it I had occasion to participate in the 
Committee on Hindu Law that was appointed in 1944-45. As such 
I have my sympathies with those who wish to advance the cause of 
the weaker sex. I believe that no country or society can advance if 
it has got submerged and suppressed people in its fold. It is very 
necessary that everyone should have equality before the law and in 
the matter of inheritance and other things. But it would be idle on 
our part to ignore the feelings of others. Feel as I may for myself. 
I must also realise what others are feeling, and as you, Sir, very 
poignantly pointed out, it is very necessary that there should be no 
dictatorship. 

The Hon. the Law Minister in his speech in the Constituent 
Assembly, on the memorable day we completed the drawing up of 
the Constitution, said as follows : 

“It is quite possible in a country like India — where democracy from its 
long disuse must be regarded as something quite new — there is danger 
of democracy giving place to dictatorship. It is quite possible for this 
new born democracy to retain its form but give place to dictatorship 
in fact. If there is a landslide, the danger of the second possibility 
becoming actuality is much greater.” 

I commend to him his own speech and ask whether it would not 
be dictatorship on the part of this house to dictate to the thirty-six 
crores of people of India to come under a law compulsorily, just as 
the old orthodoxy was denying the right of going forward to the more- 
advanced members of society. It is a dictatorship which a minority is 
going to exercise on a vast majority. I wish to tell my sisters and the 
reformist brothers that they must take heart. In everything there is a 
fair way of fructification. They have the whole field before them. I find 
that orthodoxy is not only not aggressive, but is on the defensive — is 
putting on the garb of reformists to fight its retreating battles. It is fast 
losing its momentum. We have the eternal dilemma of an irresistible 
force meeting an irremovable mass. But that mass is becoming 
every day lighter and lighter and its roots are getting uprooted 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


953 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 953 

every day. Therefore, this orthodoxy will not remain adamant, 
as it has been in the past. But is it necessary that the reformist 
should become aggressive ? Should they play the game of the old 
orthodox people and try to dictate what they feel to be the best to 
people who do not regard them as the best but as the worst ? Why 
should you do that ? That is the question and in that question my 
community also joins. 

We feel that our system of law, and our system of distribution 
of wealth is more democratic and more socialistic and more, if I 
may say so, akin to the communistic, than the system which is 
proposed in this piece of legislation before us. 

I think the major amendments to clause 2 can be divided into three 
categories. Firstly, some of the amendments, notably amendment 
Nos. 13 and 14 of the Consolidated List want to increase its 
applicability. Amendment No. 13 of the supplementary list also. Then 
there are certain amendments, like No. 18 which wants to decrease 
its applicability. Then there is the third category, which wants to 
restrict its applicability to only those who wish to come under this. 
I think it is a very good media which has been suggested by Shri 
Jaspat Roy Kapoor and deserves the most serious consideration of 
this House — whether it would not serve our purpose by having 
a better code than the reformed Code which Dr. Ambedkar has 
brought before the House. He had to give some concession much 
against his wish. 

I wish to state a few facts for the consideration of the House. These 
facts are that the Bill sought to be amended by Dr. Ambedkar is so 
materially different from the Report of the Select Committee that we 
should in common justice recirculate these amendments and get the 
opinion of the country whether they wish to have this in the form 
in which they have been brought or not, and there is no time for 
that. This House is under dissolution. It will last probably, if things 
do not move in an untoward direction — which may quite possibly 
happen on account of the war — for a few more months. Now, I ask 
my lady friends and reformists whether it would not be better for 
them to take up the challenge of the orthodoxy now. According to 
Shri Jaspat Roy Kapoor’s amendment it is only a question of how far 
you are going to get the co-operation of the people to come and be 
under this Act. There is no occasion better than the election. In the 
election booth all the adult population of the country will be coming. 
If you have a system of registration running side by side with the 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


954 


954 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

election booth and have a register in which every voter will put in. 
his thumb impression to indicate that he is willing to come under this 
Code, you can get the mandate of the people. Then you can confront 
orthodoxy and come and say that a vast majority of the country wants 
this reform, orthodoxy must go back and the day has been won for 
the reformists. But you do not do it. If you do not seriously convert 
the people to your idea, why do you ask that this body should get the 
odium of thrusting something on the people which it is professed they 
do not want and which you are unable to prove they want. 

I therefore suggest that if the Hon. the Law Minister is not prepared 
to accept the amendment of my hon. friend Mr. Jaspat Roy Kapoor 
in toto, he may at least follow the example set in the Shariat Act 
of ours where parts of it were made compulsorily applicable to all 
but parts of it were reserved for only those who would come and get 
themselves registered. This is the second suggestion which I wish to 
make to the Hon. Minister. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Will the hon. Member please say which are 
those parts ? 

Shri Hussain Imam : I wish to state that there are certain parts 
to which very serious objection has been taken, notably by you, Sir, 
about the distribution of property to the daughter. If you want that 
this portion should not apply to all, you can make it a provision of 
this nature, namely, that this part — Chapter IV — may apply only to 
those who wish to come into it. 

I would also mention the possibility of the grave dangers which 
this amendment of Dr. Ambedkar on the question of property has 
brought in. My valued friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava suggested 
that the girls should get a share while they are unmarried and when 
they get married they should be entitled to the husband’s property 
in the father-in-laws’s house. But you must not forget the divorced 
women. How has the modern Manu provided for them ? Dr. Ambedkar 
has not provided for the divorced women who are deprived of the 
share. He has provided for the share to remain permanently for the 
girl — half a share for the unmarried girl and quarter of a share for 
the married girl. But Pandit Thakur Dasji has suggested no share for 
the divorced woman. Under Dr. Ambedkar’s rule she will continue to 
have a quarter of a share. But Pandit Thakur Dasji would deprive 
her even of that quarter share because as soon as she gets married 
she will have no share. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


955 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 955 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : According to me she would be 
entitled to the rights of partnership in the property of the new husband. 

Shri Hussain Imam : If she does not remarry ? I therefore think 
that another danger of the provision made by Dr. Ambedkar is that 
it might lead to immorality — the provision that on marriage a woman 
will lose half of her property and will be entitled only to a quarter of 
the father’s property. A rich girl would never marry a poor husband. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Why bother about the rich ? 

Shri Hussain Imam : As long as you have not changed the system 
and do not go to the Moscow-Peking axis of my hon. friend Brajeshwar 
Prasad, you have to care for wealth and capital. When you come to 
that day you will no longer bother about this. 

I was rather surprised that Dr. Ambedkar who is a born democrat 
should have made disparaging remarks about the electorate. The 
‘electorate with all its ignorance is the only touch-stone by means 
of which we can test democracy. If that is removed, democracy will 
become meaningless, lifeless and only an effigy of democracy. Because, 
what did Hitler do ? He had elections, but a system was evolved by 
means of which elections were made. ..(An hon. Member : Easy). ..not 
easy, but they were made only a cloak to cover the dictates of the 
dictator. The same thing will happen if we accept this dictum that 
the electorate has no right and the right is reserved to the Members 
of Parliament alone to decide whatever they like and in whatever 
manner they choose to do. 

I would again mention one fact, not the competence of this House — I 
would be the last person, having been for twenty years in the Central 
Legislature, to question the competence of this Legislature — but would 
it not be better to leave a measure of this nature to the popularly 
elected representatives who would come to this House with the direct 
mandate of the electorate ? I am suggesting this as a method of finding 
out the will of the people. As long as we pay at least lip service to 
democracy our ultimate masters and the arbiters of our fate are the 
electors. This is going to affect all. I wish to warn the House that as 
against the Bill as reported by the Select Committee, as a result of 
the change of the Constitution, we are going to hit each and every 
individual property. Even a small farm of an acre of land is not 
free from the ambit of this new Bill, because land is now brought 
in under the purview of the Central Legislature, whereas what the 
Bill as reported by the Select Committee affected was only fifteen 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


956 


956 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to sixteen per cent of the population. Is it proper, is it democratic for you 
without going to a Select Committee even to so change the nature of the 
Bill that it will affect hundred per cent, of the citizens of India — because 
Land has now been brought into the purview of the Central Legislature ? 
I very respectfully beg to suggest that it is not proper for this Legislature, 
keeping self-respect in view, to go so much forward without even the 
formality of having a Select Committee to go over it. I know that now it 
is no good crying over spilt milk. But I am bringing all these arguments 
in favour of making this Bill elective. I do not say, having advanced so 
far and having made so many mistakes in the past, that you should 
now brush it away. But at least you should have the decency to say 
that you will allow the people to have their choice whether they wish to 
be under this Act or not. This choice may be either general as my hon. 
friend Mr. Jaspat Roy Kapoor has suggested, or it may be restricted as 
I am suggesting now for the consideration of Government. Government 

[Mr. Speaker in the Chair.] 

have got ample time according to present estimates. The Bill is not going 
to be proceeded with immediately now. Therefore it is possible 
for Government to reconsider their position. In all humility I 
would appeal to Government to give if their best consideration and make 
it elective in full and if that is not possible for having it at least in part 
made elelctive and not compulsory. Otherwise it will be dictatorship and 
not democracy. 

Mr. Speaker : We will now take up the half an hour discussion. 

Shri Gadgil : A request was made by hon. Members to let the House 
know about a certain accident that has happended in the morning in 
the Chandni Chowk. 

Mr. Speaker : I think it had better be taken at 5-30 instead of now. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 957 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 957 

*HINDU CODE — contd. 

Clause 2. — (Application of Code) — Contd. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal) : I have a point of order.... 

Shrimati Durgabai (Madras) : On what subject, may I know, is 
the hon. Member raising his point of order ? There is no subject before 
the House on which the point of order could be raised. First of all the 
motion should be moved. 

Shri Sondhi (Punjab) : Who are you ? You are not sitting in the 
Chair (Interruptions). 

Shrimati Durgabai : The motion must be made first. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The business before the House is further 
consideration of the Bill to amend and codify certain branches if the 
Hindu Law, as reported by the Select Committee. Clause 2 of the Bill 
is under consideration. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari (Assam) : Before anything is said or done I 
would earnestly appeal to the House through you, Sir, that there need 
not be any unnecessary excitement. I am constrained to say that the 
conduct which has just now been shown by Shrimati Durgabai is far 
from such and is. ..(Interruptions). 

Further more I wish to know whether the attention of the Government 
has been drawn to a Press news published yesterday, namely, that even 
if this Bill be passed the President may withhold his assent and so 
far (Interruptions). 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Order, order 

Shrimati Durgabai : May I give an explanation since the hon. Member 
has referred to me ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Not while I am on my legs ... 

Shrimati Durgabai : You must give me an opportunity to answer 
what the hon. Member has said (Interruptions). 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Order, order. The hon. Member who advised 
another hon. Member not to be excited is himself excited. One should 
sit on the right and the other on the left. 

So far as the reference to the President is concerned his name ought 
not to be canvassed for the purpose of this Bill one way or the other. 
Rule 159 (vi) says that a Member while speaking shall not use the 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 17th September 1951, pp. 2674-2738. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


958 


958 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

President’s name for the purpose of influencing the debate. The 
President’s name ought not to be referred to here at all. 

Shri Kamath (Madhya Pradesh) : Not on a point of order, but on a 
point of propriety, when such a measure as the Hindu Code is before 
the House, is it quite proper for the Hon. Law Minister to have such 
a big basket before him ? 

Shri R, K. Chaudhari : This does not fit in with the serious topic 
before the House. I want to know if it is a fact that the President will 
address this House on the Hindu Code. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : No reference to the President can be permitted 
irrespective of anything that might have appeared in the papers. Now, 
what is the point of order of Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : rose — 

Sardar B. S. Man (Punjab) : Before the lion. Member makes his 
point of order, may I say, Sir, that you have made certain observations 
previously in the debate that in your kindness you show certain 
concessions to lady Members here. Now when we are going to discuss 
this Bill may I request that henceforward you will treat hon. lady 
Members and men Members on an equal footing and no concessions 
will be shown to lady Members ? It is high time for them to make up 
their mind either to have the concessions or to have the Hindu Code 
Bill ( Interruptions ). 

Shrimati Durgabai : I would like the Chair to give a ruling. It was 
a fact that the Chair said sometime ago that special concessions were 
sought or asked for by the women Members and it is a fact that the 
women Members had emphatically protested that they did not want any 
special concession at all. Therefore, the hon. Member is quite wrong 
in saying what is not true. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am fully aware that lady Members do not 
want any special concessions for themselves : it could not have been 
their intention. If therefore, I had made any such remark I thought 
that it would be taken in good humour and it was not my intention to 
cast any reflections. I know very well that no lady Member has ever 
been in need of any concession or indulgence. So far as I am concerned 
I have got both sons and daughters, and therefore, I shall try to be 
absolutely just. Now what is the point of order ? With respect to points 
of order I may remind hon. Members that they may state their points 
cryptically without any arguments, unless I want some elucidation with 
regard to them. I hope hon. Members will bear this in mind. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


959 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 959 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I shall state the point of order and elucidate 
it very briefly just to make it intelligible. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : If I fail to understand I will ask the hon- 
Member. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: My point of order concerns the applicability 
of the Bill to the former Indian States, some of which are now known as 
Part B States and some others have been incorporated in Part A States. 
The whole point is directed towards that question and I am directing 
my mind to that. 

Hon. Members : What is the point of order ? 

Pandit Maitra (West Bengal) : Is it the hon. Member’s point that 
the Bill has not been published to them ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Yes, the Bill has not been published to 
them. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have understood the point of order. 

10 A.M. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I have to state a few facts. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : “Few facts” are not necessary so far as this 
point of order is concerned. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : There are rulings of the Chair on this 
point. I wish to draw your attention to this point which was raised by 
Mr. Sarwate on the 24th February, 1949 ... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The House is on clause 2. Is this relevant so 
far as clause 2 is concerned ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Yes, clause 2 will also apply to the former 
Indian States. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member knows too well that the 
scope or the extent of the operation of this Bill is governed by clause 
1. Clause 1 (2) says : 

“It extends to all the Provinces of India.” 

This point of order may be relevant as to whether in this unrestricted 
manner it ought to be allowed, or whether, as it was originally framed, 
it does not apply under the Constitution. There may be many reasons 
for and against, but the point of order may be raised at that stage, not 
at this stage. Now we are going into general considerations : if they do 
not apply to Part B or Part C States, we will restrict them when we 
come to clause 1. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


960 


960 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : It will lead to inconvenience ; that will 
no doubt come formally, in due course : we should not be made to wait 
till that time. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have given my ruling. The hon. Member 
does not say that this clause 2 will not apply to any State whatsoever; 
if it applies even to a small village in a single State in the whole of 
India we shall proceed with clause 2. When we come to clause 1 we 
shall eliminate all the others where it ought not to apply under the 
Constitution. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : The difficulty is this. If the Members 
belonging to the States know before hand that the Bill will not apply to 
them, they will not trouble themselves about the matter and discussion 
will be shortened. But on the other hand, if they are in the dark as to 
whether it will apply to them or not, they will have to partake in the 
debate. So, in order to clarify the situation we ought to know where 
we are and where they are. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member knows too well that we 
come back, after exhausting all the other clauses, to clause 1. Any 
hon. Member who is a representative of the States may proceed on the 
footing that it will apply — he may do so in the first instance. Then he 
may make an effort along with Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad to get it out. 
There is time enough. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar) : Before we proceed with the 
Bill, I think the House is entitled to know the procedure which has 
been adopted from the papers we learn that only two parts of the Bill, 
concerning marriage and divorce, will be taken. It will be desirable for 
the Hon. Minister to explain the position so that the House may know 
in what direction we are proceeding and how this matter is ultimately 
going to be decided. That is one point to which I want to draw your 
attention, Sir, and the attention of the House. The other point to which 
I want to draw your attention and the attention of the Hon. Minister 
and of the House is this. Now the appearance of the Bill seems to be 
such that it is difficult to recognise it. As a matter of fact, the Hon. Law 
Minister himself, who is the Mover of the Bill, has sent in a very large 
number of amendments some of which reached us even yesterday. You 
will appreciate the importance of a Bill like the Hindu Code. You have 
also seen the seriousness that is attached to this Code by the Members 
of this House. We are really in a difficult position to find out suddenly 
what the amendments are, what the implications of those amendments 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


961 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 961 

are, and whether amendments to the amendments should be sent 
because that is what will form the main basis of discussion, namely the 
amendments of Dr. Ambedkar. These are the difficulties that are facing us. 
In order that the Code may go through the House properly and ultimately 
the decision of the House may be such as to evoke respect in the country, 
it is desirable that some time is given so that the amendments may be 
read. You will remember, Sir, that when the Bill was introduced and sent 
to the Select Committee there was a Select Committee report. After that 
Dr. Ambedkar sent a large number of amendments. On the one side we 
have the amendments, on the other side the Select Committee’s report; 
now, even those amendments are no more there-fresh amendments have 
been sent. All these are to be consolidated and placed in a manner in 
which they can be conveniently considered, and considered in a manner 
which the importance of the Code deserves. I think we should adopt 
some procedure by which these amendments can be considered carefully. 
I would also like the Law Minister to let the House know what is the 
latest decision of the Government with regard to the procedure to be 
adopted with regard to the Hindu Code. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : I will put another question so that it may 
be answered along with this ... 

Shri B. Das (Orissa) : May I submit, Sir. ... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Nothing more. 

So far as the amendments are concerned, a set of amendments were 
tabled by the Hon. Law Minister originally and subsequently to these 
amendments he has tabled another set of amendments. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : A few — verbal. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Even if they were substantial they have all 
been circulated as early as the 5th September. But if any hon. Member, 
during the course of the debate, move an amendment to any particular 
amendment, and if it is reasonable, we will consider it. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Certainly, I have no objection. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am not going to be too technical with respect 
to those matters here. After all, the Hon. Minister has been saying that 
he would like to have as much as agreed solution to these problems 
as possible. Therefore, every efforts will be made on all sides of the 
House towards it. I shall never be wanting, if it is possible, in trying to 
smoothen and to get over the rules of procedure or to suspend standing 
orders for bringing about an amicable settlement so far as any clauses 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


962 


962 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

are concerned. Hon. Members may have no difficulty. But so far as 
once again piecing the amendments together and circulating them again 
is concerned, hon. Members know too well how we were in an ocean 
of amendments so far as the Representation of the People Bill was 
concerned ; the Speaker could not know the amendments, a number 
of new amendments were given to the hon. Minister himself. This is 
not such a forest in which we cannot get in. After all, there are a few 
amendments to the original amendments and we can proceed. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : One other submission, Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Hon. members must make up their mind to 
go on with the Bill. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : That we have made up. 

Shri B. Das : Is he permitted to speak again ? 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : There is one other submission which 
I will make, Sir. We have been following a procedure, namely that 
all the amendments are first moved, then they are discussed together 
and then decisions are arrived at. I would submit that in the case of 
the Hindu Code that will not be possible because every amendment 
has a particular significance ; it is not a question of a cut motion 
being discussed or of a budget demand being discussed ; it is a 
question of every amendment having a particular significance, having 
a particular importance. Therefore, I would submit that in the case 
of the consideration of the Hindu Code these amendments should be 
taken up one by one ; each amendment should be taken up, discussed 
and then decided upon — either accepted or rejected — and only then the 
next amendment taken up. That, I submit, ought to be the procedure 
with regard to this Bill. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : May I ask for only one piece of information ? 
There are certain amendments which have been tabled now after we had 
a discussion on this Bill in February last: these are new amendments 
which have been tabled since. I want to know whether those Members 
who had taken part in discussion in February will be entitled to speak 
on the new amendments now. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I shall consider the suggestion when the 
time arises. So far as these amendments are concerned what I propose 
doing is this. Normally the procedure is that each amendment is taken 
up and disposed of and then we go to the next. But here, if there 
are amendments of like nature, except the form of expression if the 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


963 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 963 

substance is the same then I will ask hon. Members to move all those 
amendments together so that a single discussion may proceed. Those 
amendments which are substantially different. I will place separately. 
It would be helpful if the Hon. Minister is able to tell me what all 
amendments are of like nature ; hon. Members may also consider the point 
when amendments are moved ; if they find other amendments which are 
substantially of a like nature they may also rise and ask that they be 
moved together, and the discussion will proceed on all of them together. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray (West Bengal): If people are willing, we might 
have a time-limit on speeches. 

Hon. Members : No, no. 

The Minister of Works, Production and Supply (Shri Gadgil): 

It will be better for the Chair to select a group of amendments which 
contain the same substance, and that group may be put down for 
discussion. That will avoid wastage of time. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : That is exactly what I said. I have no time to 
group them myself. I shall ask hon. Members, as soon as an amendment 
is moved by Dr. Ambedkar, whether they have amendments of a like 
nature relating to the same subject. If they have, then I shall piece them 
together and have a common discussion. That is for tomorrow. 

As for today, let us proceed with the business. Clause 2 was under 
discussion. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : Would you put my suggestion to the House, 
Sir? 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Has the Hon. Minister got nothing to 
say on the points that I made ? 

My Deputy Speaker : I do not think he wishes to say anything. Does 
he want to say anything ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : No. Sir. 

The Minister of Education (Maulana Azad) : The Prime Minister 
will explain it. 

The Prime Minister (Shri Jawaharlal Nehru): I am sorry I was 
not here when the hon. Member spoke. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : He wanted to know if there are any portions 
of this Bill that are not to be considered. Clause 2 was under discussion 
previously and naturally I wanted the discussion to proceed and I was 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 964 

964 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

about to allow amendments to be moved. Meanwhile, the hon. Member 
wanted to know whether the Hon. Minister is taking up any particular 
portions of this Bill first and giving them preference. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : In view of the reports in the Press, I 
wanted to know the correct position. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru : I think the day before yesterday I did say 
something on this very subject, that is, we propose to take up Parts I 
and II of this Bill and if time permits we shall take up more. In any 
case, we do not want to leave the matter unfinished in regard to these 
two parts. We should like to finish them, even though in regard to the 
rest what we shall do depends on time. 

Shri Kamath : Has any definite number of days been earmarked for 
the consideration of this Bill ? 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru : We expect that we shall finish it within 
this week. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : This month or this week ? 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru : This week, I said. 

Dr. Ambedkar : With your permission, I should like to move 
amendment No. 4, in list No. 1. It seeks to substitute ‘tribe or community’ 
to bring it in conformity with the rest of the clause. I beg to move: 

In the amendment proposed by me, printed as No. 3, after part (1) 
(i) insert: 

“(ia) in part (c) (ii) for ‘community’ substitute ‘tribe or community’; ”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment moved : 

In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, printed 
as No. 3, after part (1) (i) insert: 

“(ia) in part (c)(ii) for ‘community’ substitute ‘tribe or community’; ”. 

Dr. Ambedkar has already moved amendment No. 3 during the last 
session. That amendment and this one are before the House. Has any 
other hon. Member got amendments relating to the same subject ? — to 
the same subject, and not to clause 2 as a whole ? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh) : Is it your intention, Sir, that if 
we have amendments to the amendments No. 3 and 4 of Dr. Ambedkar, 
we may move them ? 


Mr. Deputy Speaker : Yes. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


965 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 965 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : So, with your permission, I should like first to 
move No. 95 of list No. 2. As a matter of fact, I had in my original notice 
given it as an amendment to amendment No. 3 of Dr. Ambedkar, but 
here it has been given as an independent amendment. That has been 
done by the office for the sake of facility probably. I am mentioning 
this only to avoid any objection from any quarter that No. 95 is not an 
amendment to the amendment of Dr. Ambedkar. I beg to move : 

(i) For clause 2, substitute : 

“2. Application of Code . — This Code applies to all the citizens of India 
that is Bharat, who after attaining the age of majority declare in writing 
that they shall be governed by this Code, and get such declaration 
registered in accordance with rules prescribed for the purposes by the 
Central Government: 

Provided that the provisions of Part II relating to marriage and 
divorce shall apply to such declarant only when both the bride and the 
bridegroom before the marriage, or both the husband and wife after the 
marriage, make such a declaration.” 

Then, in the same context, I would ask your permission to move 
amendment No. 97 in list No. 2, I beg to move: 

(ii) In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 
printed as No. 3, after part (2), insert: 

“(3) After sub-clause (3), the following new sub-clause be inserted, 
namely: — 

‘(4) This code or any part or parts thereof also apply to any other 
person who after attaining the age of majority declares in writing that 
he shall be governed by this Code, or any part or parts thereof as the 
case may be, and get such declaration registered in accordance with 
rules prescribed for the purposes by the Central Government: 

Provided that the provisions of Part II relating to marriage and. 
divorce shall apply to such declarant only when both the bride and the 
bridegroom before the marriage, or both the husband and wife after the 
marriage, have made such a declaration.’ ” 

I also beg to move: 

(iii) In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 
printed as No. 3, in part (l)(ii) of the proposed amendment to sub-clause 
(1) of clause 2, after “Sikh religion” add : 

“or to any other religion or faith except Muslim, Christian, Parsi, or 
Jew religion.” 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 966 

966 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(iv) After part (c) (ii) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, insert: 

“(iii) to any orphan or abandoned child brought up by the State.” 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha (Bihar): May I suggest that instead of hon. 
Members reading all the amendments, they may only refer to their 
numbers. Because the amendments sometimes tantamount to a speech. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is no good our closing our eyes. There 
is a limit to this kind of suggestion. The amendments must be read ; 
we cannot rush through like this. Certainly I will allow all reasonable 
debate on the matter. I myself am not able to understand at times. 
Except on formal matters, when I shall ask hon. Members not to read 
the amendments, the amendments must be read. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Thank you for your direction, Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : That does not mean that the hon. Member 
can be dilatory. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : If the suggestion of my hon. friend were to be 
pursued to its logical length, we can even say that all the amendments 
standing in the name of an hon. Member are moved. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : We need not dilate upon that. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : I beg to move : 

(v) for sub -clause (3) of clause 2, substitute : 

“(3) The expression ‘Hindu ‘wherever it occurs in this Code shall 
be construed as if it included a person who, though not a Hindu by 
religion is, nevertheless governed, or declares his consent in the manner 
prescribed by the Central government in this behalf to be governed, by 
the provisions of this Code.” 

Then I come to amendment No. 272 of List 5. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I think we might take up sub-clause by sub- 
clause. There are a number of sub -clauses in clauses 2. Unless any 
amendment can be brought under anyone of these sub-clauses we shall 
carry on with sub-clause (1). Then we shall take up the other sub-clauses. 
What is the Hon. Minister’s reaction to this suggestion ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am quite agreeable to that. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : May I submit that all the amendments might 
be allowed to be moved. We shall follow the procedure we adopted in 
the Constituent Assembly from tomorrow onwards. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Today, I leave it to hon. Members to move 
whatever amendments they like. Tomorrow I shall have them consolidated 
under each sub -clause. 


Shri J. R. Kapoor : I beg to move : 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 967 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 967 

(vi) In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 
printed as No. 3, for part (2) substitute : 

“(2) for sub-clause (4) the following be substituted, namely : — 

‘(4) This Code or any Part or Parts thereof also apply to any other 
person who declares his consent in the manner prescribed by the Central 
Government in this behalf to be governed by this Code or any part or 
parts thereof, as the case may be.’ ” 

(vii) In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 
printed as No. 3, in the proposed amendment to clause 2, after part 
(1), insert: 

“(1A) in the proviso to sub-clause (2), insert at the end ‘unless he 
has declared his consent in the manner prescribed by the Central 
Government in this behalf to be governed by this Code in respect of 
such matters also.’ ” 

(viii) In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 
. printed as No. 3, in the proposed amendment to clause 2, after part 
(1), insert: 

“(1A) in sub-clause (3) for the words ‘the provisions’ the words ‘any 
or more of the provisions’ be substituted.” 

Or, in the alternative, if that be not acceptable to the House: 

(ix) In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 
printed as No. 3, in the proposed amendment to clause 2, after part 
(1), insert: 

“(1A) in sub-clause (3) insert at the end ‘in respect of any or more of 
the matters dealt with herein’.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : “Any one or more” is the usual expression. 
Is it not? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : I agree, Sir, to your suggestion. This exhausts 
my amendments to amendment No. 3 of Dr. Ambedkar. 

There is one amendment which I seek to move to my own previous 
amendment moved during the last session. 

I beg to move : 

(x) In the amendment proposed by me, printed as No. 93, to the 
proposed clause 2, add the proviso : 

“Provided that the provisions of Part II relating to marriage and divorce 
shall apply to such declarant only when both the bride and bridegroom 
before the marriage, or both the husband and wife after the marriage, 
make such a declaration.” 


Mr. Deputy Speaker : A similiar amendment has already been moved. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


968 


968 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : This is an amendment to my own previous 
amendment. Then I wish to move my amendment No. 125. 

I beg to move : 

(xi) To clause 2, add the proviso : 

“Provided that the provisions of parts II or/and VII relating to marriage 
and divorce, and succession shall not apply to any person unless such 
person, after attaining the age of majority declares in writing that he or 
she, as the case may be, shall be governed by the said provisions, and 
gets such declaration registered in accordance with rules prescribed for 
the purpose by the Central Government: 

Provided further that the provisions of Part II relating to marriage 
and divorce shall apply to such declarant only when both the bride and 
bridegroom before the marriage, or both the husband and wife after the 
marriage, make such a declaration.” 

There is only one more amendment, notice of which I have given this 
morning. It is a small amendment and with your permission I shall 
move it. 

I beg to Move : 

(xii) In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 
printed as No. 3, in the proposed amendments to sub-clause (1) of clause 
2, after part (1) (ii), insert : 

“(iii) insert a new part (e) as follows : 

‘(e) to a convert to any religion or faith after the commencement of 
this Code’.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : That is, if on the date of the commencement 
of this Code there is a Hindu, even if he changes his religion after the 
commencement of this Code it is this Code which will apply to him 
notwithstanding the change of religion. Is that the intention ? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : The intention is that if any person changes his 
faith after the commencement of this Code, then this Code shall apply 
to him. Suppose a Hindu changes his faith after the commencement of 
this Code and becomes a Muslim, even then it will not be open to him 
to have two, three or four wives at a time as he likes. That is, it should 
not be open to anyone to convert himself into a Muslim in order only 
to get over the provisions of this Code and to have more than one wife. 
There are other implications also of my amendment but I have explained 
this one important implication. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : One wife will be sufficiently difficult; two 
wives would be out of the question ! 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


969 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 969 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Today I will allow all amendments to be moved 
to clause 2 — both to the original clause and to the amendments of the 
Hon. Minister. I shall try to put them together tomorrow. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab) : May I know if any of the 
amendments which my hon. friend has just now moved were moved in 
the February session also ? I think one of the amendments moved now 
was debated in the House — the amendment relating to a person declaring 
that he will be bound by the Code. I think he also made a speech on 
that. I do not know if that amendment has not already been moved and 
also debated upon. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : I may assure my hon. friend that I have taken 
jolly good care to see that I do not repeat any one of my previous 
amendments. Of course the subject matter of some of these amendments 
was incorporated in some form or another in a previous amendment that 
I have moved. But finding that, that particular amendment would not 
well suit the purpose, and in order to meet the objection raised then by 
my hon. friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava, I have further amended my 
previous amendment so as to bring it perfectly within the four corners 
of the Code and also to. make it otherwise acceptable. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : I beg to move : 

To clause 2, add the proviso : 

“Provided however, that notwithstanding anything contained in this 
section this Code shall not apply to any person unless such person got 
his name registered, signifying his will to be governed by this Code, 
with such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed.” 

Sardar B. S. Man (Punjab) : I beg to move : 

In clause 2, omit “Sikh”, wherever it occurs. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. member’s desire, I take it, is that 
it ought not be apply to Sikhs. 

Sardar B. S. Man : Yes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : At each stage let us know what the scope of 
the amendment is ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Such an amendment has already 
been moved. The subject-matter of amendment No. 236 is the same as 
Sardar Hukam Singh’s amendment. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Let us forget what all has been done. Let 
us start. The intention of the House is to proceed clause by clause and 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


970 


970 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

have a connected picture — and so there is no harm if there is a repetition 
or if it is moved once again so as to focus attention. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : In that case in the February session 
I moved an amendment and also made a speech on it. Is it necessary 
for me to move it again ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is not necessary. 

Dr. Ambedkar : No, we know them. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari: May I draw your attention to amendment No, 
123 ? This stands in the name of Shri Jhunjhunwala who was here just 
now. But he asked me to bring this to your notice because he has gone 
outside the House owing to an urgent call. So he will come and move it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Let him come. After he comes he can move it. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : You were kind enough to say this morning 
that amendments where the subject-matter is the same should be moved 
together. I want to ask whether you are allowing such amendments 
which were moved and on which speeches were made for three days, to 
be moved once again. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : They are pending. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray: Certain amendments were moved and speeches 
made on them in the February session for three or four days. I want to 
know whether those are to be repeated now. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : What I propose to do is this. If any particular 
Member who has already moved his amendments wants to draw attention 
to them. He can indicate those amendments. I will make a note, the 
office also has a note. So that when the time comes I will put them. In 
so far as speeches have already been made I shall take care to see that 
there is no repetition of them. That is all that I can say. 

Shri Kamath : But discussion on those amendments is not barred. 
Does it mean that all those amendments have been disposed of? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : No. All the amendments are under discussion. 
No amendment has been disposed of. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : There is bound to be a certain amount 
of repetition because the House has meanwhile forgotten everything. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member knows how helpless I have 
become even if repititions are made. Therefore, I suggest to myself mat 
I should be a little more careful. 

Dr. Tek Chand (Punjab): I beg to move : - 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


971 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 971 

In part (a) sub-clause (1) of clause 2 , for “members”, substitute 
“followers”. 

it is only a formal amendment and Dr. Ambedkar has agreed to 
accept this. The clause will then read : “and followers of the Brahmo, 
the Prarthana or the Arya Samaj”. 

Shri Bhatt (Bombay) : I beg to move : 

For sub-clause (2) of clause 2, substitute : 

“(2) This Code also applies to any person, irrespective of his religion, 

who has been governed by the Hindu law or by any customor usage as 

part of that law in respect of any matters dealt with herein.” 

I have tabled no other amendment. But Dr. Ambedkar has used the 
word ‘community’ with ‘tribe’, will he not also put in the word ‘clan’ 
with them ? 

Shri Barman (West Bengal) : I beg to move : 

In the proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 2, for “in respect of those 
matters” occuring at the end, substitute : 

“in respect of matters which that person has not voluntarily chosen.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. member wants to give an option for 
him to come into the Hindu Code. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Something like that. 

Shri Barman : My intention is that a person who has voluntarily 
chosen to adopt the customs and usage of the Hindu law will not be 
allowed subsequently to say that he is not governed by them, but any 
third person may challenge or may prove that, that person was not 
governed by the Hindu Code and as such as regards the other matters 
the Code will not apply to him ; but as regards the matter which that 
person has himself voluntarily chosen, other persons would be precluded 
from challenging him. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : If he has already chosen, he will not be 
governed by the earlier portion of the Hindu Law. Perhaps the hon, 
Member wants to make it more clear. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I beg to move : 

(i) Omit part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2. 

(ii) In part (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, for “Hindus, that is to 
say, all persons professing the Hindu religion” substitute “persons who 
are Hindus by religion”. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


972 


972 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : That is the same thing as the Hon. Minister’s 
amendment. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : There is a verbal change. 

Then, I beg to move : 

(iii) For part "(b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, substitute: 

“(b) to any person who is a Jaina by religion.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is an alternative amendment. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Yes, Sir. 

Then, I beg to move : 

(iv) In part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, for “Jaina or Sikh” 
substitute “or Jaina”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : He wants to eliminate the Sikhs and Buddhists. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Yes, Sir. 

Dr. Ambedkar : There are varities of amendments. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Some of them are alternatives. 

Dr. Ambedkar : One amendment says that Buddhists and Sikhs 
should be omitted and another says Jains should be omitted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member does not want the Jains 
to be omitted. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : ‘Jains’ should stand. These are different 
variations of amendments, because hon. Members do not know which 
will be acceptable to the House and particularly by the Hon. Minister. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : In all his amendments I find that the ‘Jains 
‘is the common factor. He wants the others, that is, the Buddhists and 
Sikhs to be omited. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : ‘Jains’ I have not objected but the Sikhs 
have seriously objected. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : They are now governed by the Hindu Code. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : The whole question is whether this kind 
of Hindu law should be forced upon them ? They are Hindus no doubt, 
but should this kind of non-Hindu Law or rather un-Hindu Law be 
forced upon them ? 

Then, I beg to move: 

(v) In part (c)(i) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, after “illegitimate” insert: 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


973 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 973 

“who, if he has attained the age of eighteen years, is himself a Hindu 

and” 

(vi) In part (c)(i) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, after “parents are” 
insert “or have been”. 

(vii) In part (d) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, at the end, add : “subject 
to his rights and liabilities before his conversion.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Let me pause here. Let us understand the 
implications of this. Shri Jaspat Roy Kapoor wants that notwithstanding 
change of religion by a Hindu after the passing of this Code, his rights 
and liabilities must be regulated by the Hindu Code. This amendment 
wants that if a person wants to change and become a convert, his rights 
and liabilities under his original religion ought not to be affected. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : If he is wrong, I am also equally wrong. 
We are in a vicious circle. That goes against the very idea of conversion. 
If a man is converted, he loses his past and begins a new chapter. As Mr. 
Kapoor has submitted his amendment, I am submitting this amendment. 
Both should be accepted or both should be rejected. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Both the hon. Members want to avoid any 
change in their legal or civic rights as a result of conversion. Conversion 
ought not to affect their rights and liabilities with respect to property, 
succession, etc. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : There is an old Act which saves the past 
rights of Hindus converted to Christianity. That also reserves past rights 
and liabilities. 

(viii) Then, I beg to move : 

After sub-clause (1) of clause 2, insert : 

“(1A) This Code shall not apply to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 

Tribes.” 

Dr. M. M. Das (West Bengal) : May I know what right the hon. 
Member has got to speak on behalf of the Scheduled Castes ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : At present, I am only moving my 
amendments. I am not trying to explain them ; I am not now trying to 
convince my hon. Friend. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There are some people who are more loyal to 
others than others themselves. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I shall state my reasons. There are 
certain parts of the Code which would be too much for them to 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


974 


974 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

assimilate. For example, they have very simple forms of marriage and 
divorce. You are making their life more complicated. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member forgets that his objection 
is to the whole Code. If it is said that they have got simpler forms of 
marriage and divorce and these forms need not be introduced, that is 
a matter for consideration. (The whole Code goes out as if they do not 
belong to the Hindu community.) 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : My objection is to the whole Code as well 
as every part — singly as well as taken as a whole. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member forgets that there is a 
consolidating portion also ; by his amendment even those portions 
for which no exception could be taken would not apply. We are only 
preliminarily discussing what exactly the hon. Member wants. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Then, I beg to move: 

(ix) Omit sub-clause (2) of clause 2. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : This is the residuary amendment. This seems 
to be absolutely meaningless. What is the Code which should govern ? 
The Indian Succession Act ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : There may be a man who may have a 
new religion. There is in Japan a religion known as Shintoism. If a 
person professing that religion comes to India, would you apply the 
Hindu Code or the Muslim Code ? He should be governed by his own 
Code. The proviso says that if it is “proved” that another law applies to 
him, then the Hindu Code would not apply. Upon whom will the onus 
lie ? Suppose a man comes to India professing no religion. He has civil 
rights and liabilities. Would he be governed by the Hindu Code ? Why 
not the Muslim Code or the Christian Code or the Sikh Code ? Every 
man should be governed by his own Code. I shall explain this proviso 
at the proper time. This proviso also goes too far. It throws the onus 
upon a person coming into India who is not a Muslim, Christian, Parsi 
or Jew by religion, to prove his status. How can he prove that the Hindu 
Code does not apply ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : He would be governed by private international 
law. Merely because he comes here, the Hindu Code would not apply. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : The point is that the onus is thrown upon 
a stranger who might find himself absolutely in hot waters. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : This Code applies to non-Hindus to whom 
some portions of the Hindu law or customs under the Hindu Law are 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


975 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 975 

applicable. This proviso does not apply to anybody to whom no part of 
the Hindu law is applicable. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : The whole applicability of the Code goes 
by the wording of the Act and not on its so called internal meaning. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : The wording is clear. The proviso says: “Provided 
that if it is proved that such person...” “Such person” means the person 
referred to in sub-clause 2 and not a person coming from America or 
England. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I beg to move : 

(x) Omit sub-clause (3) of clause 2. 

To me, this sub-clause is to beg the question. It says : 

“The expression ‘Hindu’ in any portion of this Code shall be construed 
as if it included a person who, though not a Hindu by, religion is, 
nevertheless, governed by the provisions of this Code.” 

This is the very question we have to clarify. To whom does this Code 
apply ? We say, if the Hindu Code is applicable to any one, he is bound 
by it. The question is to whom, apart from the Hindus, this Code should 
apply. It is begging the question to say that the expression ‘Hindu’ applies 
to whom this Hindu Code applies. We shall have to clarify the matters. 
I do not claim infallibility. But, I have felt some difficulty. 

Then, I beg to move : 

(xi) Omit sub-clause (4) of clause 2. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is also my amendment. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I also beg to Move :(xii) After sub-clause 
(4) of clause 2, insert :- 

“(5) Notwithstanding anything in this section, this Code shall apply 
only to such areas or to such persons or classes of persons in any State 
and from such time or by such stages as the State legislature may from 
time to time by Act provide.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : So far as this amendment is concerned, 
we shall have to consider whether this is the proper place where this 
amendment should be considered, or it should be 

Dr. Ambedkar : It should come under clause 1. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : If you think that it will be properly 
considered along with clause 1 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : This amendment stands over and will be taken 
up when we come to clause 1. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


976 


976 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Jhunjhunwala (Bihar) : I beg to move : 

To clause 2, add the proviso : 

“Provided however, that notwithstanding anything contained in the 
above clauses this Code shall not apply to such person as will get his 
or her name registered with such authority and in such manner, as may 
be hereafter prescribed by Parliament, within five years after this Code 
comes into force and in case of a minor within five years after such a 
minor attains majority, to the effect that he or she does not want to be 
governed by this Code.” 

I have moved an amendment where I had placed the burden on the 
persons to get themselves registered who want to be governed, and if 
that is not accepted, here I have placed it on those who do not want to 
be governed by this Code. 

Shri Bhatt : I beg to move : 

In sub-clause (3) of clause 2, after “nevertheless governed”, insert “or 
desire to be governed”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I shall formally place the amendments before 
the House. So far as the amendments to clause 2 that were moved last 
time are concerned, they are already before the House. Hereafter all 
amendments must be moved at the beginning of the discussion, because 
if they continue to be moved when the discussion is in progress, hon. 
Members who have already taken part in the discussion may not be able 
to take part and speak on those new amendments. It is not a technical 
objection. These may be amendments of substance and hon. Members 
who have already spoken with reference to other amendments earlier, 
may not be sole to take part in the discussion on these new amendments. 
But in the present case, if there are any such hon. Members I shall 
consider and give them also a chance, if necessary.... 

Dr. Ambedkar : A small chance. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : A small chance. But they may not repeat what 
they had already stated. Barring that, in future, my request to hon. 
Members is that all the amendments may be moved when a particular 
clause or sub-clause is begun. Otherwise we will have to go on repeating 
the process, allowing the Members to move amendments, and going over 
the whole matter once again. 

I have already placed before the House the amendment moved by the 
Hon. Dr. Ambedkar today. I will now place before the House the other 
amendments moved today. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


977 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 977 

Amendments moved : 

(1) In the amendment proposed by Shri J. R. Kapoor, printed as No. 
93, to the proposed clause 2, add the proviso : 

“Provided that the provisions of Part II relating to marriage and 
divorce shall apply to such declarant only when both the bride and 
bridegroom before the marriage, or both the husband and wife after 
the marriage, make such a declaration.” 

(2) for clause 2, substitute : 

“2. Application of Code . — This Code applies to all the citizens of India 
that is Bharat, who after attaining the age of majority declare in writing 
that they shall be governed by this Code, and get such declaration 
registered in accordance with rules prescribed for the purposes by the 
Central Government: 

Provided that the provisions of Part II relating to marriage and 
divorce shall apply to such declarant only when both the bride and the 
bridegroom before the marriage, or both the husband and wife after 
the marriage, make such a declaration.” 

(3) In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 
printed as No. 3, in the proposed amendments to sub-clause (1) of clause 
2, after part (1) (ii) , insert: 

“(iii) insert a new part (e) as follows : 

‘(e) to a convert to any religion or faith after the commencement of 
this Code’.” 

(4) In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 
printed as No. 3, in part (1) (ii) of the proposed amendment to sub-clause 
(1) of clause 2, after “Sikh religion” add : 

“or to any other religion or faith except Muslim, Christian, Parsi or 
Jew religion.” 

(5) In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 
printed as No. 3, in the proposed amendment to clause 2, after part 
(1), insert: 

“(1A) in the proviso to sub-clause (2), insert at the end ‘unless he 
has declared his consent in the manner prescribed by the Central 
Government in this behalf to be governed by this Code in respect of 
such matters also’.” 

(6) In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 
printed as No. 3, in the proposed amendment to clause 2, after part 
(1), insert: 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


978 


978 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“(1A) in sub-clause (3) for the words ‘the provisions’ the words ‘any 
or more of the provisions’ be substituted.” 

(7) in the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 
printed as No. 3, in the proposed amendment to clause 2, after 
part (1), insert: 

“(1A) in sub-clause (3) insert at the end ‘in respect of any or more 
of the matters dealt with herein’.” 

(8) In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 
printed as No. 3, for part (2). substitute : 

“(2) for sub-clause (4), the following be substituted, namely : — 

‘(4) This Code or any Part or Parts thereof also apply to any other 
person who declares his consent in the manner prescribed by the 
Central Government in this behalf to be governed by this Code or 
any part or parts thereof, as the case may be’. ” 

(9) In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, 
printed as No. 3, after part (2), insert: 

“(3) After sub-clause (3), the following new sub-clause be inserted, 
namely: — 

‘(4) This code or any part or parts thereof also apply to any other 
person who after attaining the age of majority declares in writing 
that he shall be governed by this Code, or any part or parts thereof 
as the case may be, and get such declaration registered in accordance 
with rules prescribed for the purposes by the Central Government: 

Provided that the provisions of Part II relating to marriage and 
divorce shall apply to such declarant only when both the bride and 
the bridegroom before the marriage, or both the husband and wife 
after the marriage, have made such a declaration’. ” 

(10) In part (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, for “Hindus, that is 
to say, all persons professing the Hindu religion” substitute “persons 
who are Hindus by religion”. 

(11) In part (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, for “members”, 
substitute “followers”. 

(12) Omit part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2. 

(13) For part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, substitute : 

“(b) to any person who is a Jaina by religion.” 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


979 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 979 

(14) In part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, for “Jaina or Sikh” 
substitute “or Jaina”. 

(15) In clause 2, omit “Sikh”, wherever it occurs. 

(16) In part (c)(i) of sub-clause (I) of clause 2, after “Illegitimate” 
insert: 

“who, if he has attained the age of eighteen years, is himself a 
Hindu and.” 

(17) In part (c)(i) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, after “parents are” 
insert “or have been”. 

(18) After part (c)(ii) of sub-clause (1), of clause 2, insert: 

“(iii) to any orphan or abandoned child brought up by the State.” 

(19) In part (d) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, at the end, add : “subject 
to his rights and liabilities before his conversion.” 

(20) After sub-clause (1) of clause 2, insert: 

“(1A) This code shall not apply to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 
Tribes.” 

(21) Omit sub-clause (2) of clause 2. 

(22) for sub-clause (2) of clause 2, substitute : 

“(2) This Code also applies to any person, irrespective of his religion, 
who has been governed by the Hindu Law or by any custom or usage 
as part of that law in respect of any matters dealt with herein.” 

(23) In the proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 2, for “in respect of 
those matters” occuring at the end, substitute : 

“In respect of matters which that person has not voluntarily chosen.” 

(24) Omit sub-clause (3) of clause 2. 

(25) for sub-clause (3) of clause 2, substitute : 

“(3) The expression ‘Hindu’ wherever it occurs in this Code shall 
be construed as it included a person who, though not a Hindu by 
religion, is nevertheless governed, or declares his consent in the manner 
prescribed by the Central Government in this behalf to be governed, 
by the provisions of this Code.” 

(26) In sub-clause (3) of clause 2, after “nevertheless governed”, insert 
“or desires to be governed”. 

(27) Omit sub-clause (4) of clause 2. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


980 


980 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(28) To clause 2, add the proviso : 

“Provided that the provisions of Parts II or/and VII relating to 
marriage and divorce, and succession shall not apply to any person 
unless such person, after attaining the age of majority declares in 
writing that he or she, as the case may be, shall be governed by the 
said provisions, and gets such declaration registered in accordance 
with rules prescribed for the purpose by the Central Government. 

Provided further that the provisions of Part II relating to marriage 
and divorce shall apply to such declarant only when both the bride 
and bridegroom before the marriage, or both the husband and wife 
after the marriage, make such a declaration.” 

(29) To clause 2, add the proviso : 

“Provided however, that notwithstanding anything contained in the 
above clauses, this Code shall not apply to such person as will get 
his or her name registered with such authority and in such manner, 
as may be hereafter prescribed by Parliament, within five years after 
this Code comes into force and in case of a minor within five years 
after such a minor attains majority, to the effect that he or she does 
not want to be governed by this Code.” 

(30) To clause 2, add the proviso : 

“Provided however, that notwithstanding anything contained in this 
section this Code shall not apply to any person unless such person 
got his name registered, signifying his will to be governed by this 
Code, with such authority and in such manner as may be prescribed.” 

The other amendments on the order paper against which an asterisk 
mark is placed and which were moved in the last session are also 
before the House. The clause as well as all the amendments will now 
be under discussion. 

I will ordinarily only request hon. Members, who have not taken 
part in the debate so far on clause to rise in their seats. If hon. 
Members who have already spoken want to state any fresh points 
arising now, I will consider the matter and allow an opportunity, if 
necessary, later on. 

Pandit Malaviya (Uttar Pradesh): Sir, will you allow anybody to 
move any further amendments to this clause during the course of 
the discussion ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : What I find is, normally that is a very 
difficult affair. It is inconvenient if amendments are allowed to be 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


981 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 981 

moved at later stages, for once again hon. Members will have to apply 
their minds and .... 

Pandit Malaviya : But in view of the special circumstances that 
exist now... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Of course, during the course of the discussion, 
for the purpose of bringing about an agreement or some such thing, an 
amendment may be moved, and in that case the matter will always be 
considered. But with respect to new amendments I suppose the House 
will agree that for the reason that they will throw open the discussion 
once again, they should not be allowed. 

Khawaja Inait Ullah (Bihar): Would not an amendment that goes 
against the Constitution be out of order ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member may refer me to the points 
that are considered as out of order or beyond the scope of the House at 
the time the matter arises. 

Shri M. Naik (Orissa): If an amendment moved stands in the names 
of two or more Members, will that amendment be taken as having been 
moved by only one Member or by all the Members who have given 
notice of it ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I shall take it that all of them have moved it. 

Shri M. Naik : What happens if the hon. Member who moved it 
remains absent now ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I shall adopt the safer procedure. It is true 
that more than one Member has given notice of an amendment, and if he 
is not in his seat, it is open to any other of the hon. Members to move 
it. The question is, if all the Members are in their seats, whether all of 
them are to be taken to have moved it. By way of abundant caution we 
may say that all of them have moved it so that ultimately when there 
is any question of withdrawing that amendment and the Member who 
moved it is not in his seat, any of the other Members can withdraw it. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri: If I want to oppose any of the new amendments 
now moved when can I do so? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Whenever he rises and is called upon 
to speak. He is entitled to speak on all the amendments. (An hon. 
Member: Of one category ?) We have finished all categories. So far 
as clause 2 is concerned, I have allowed hon. Members to move all 
the amendments. Tomorrow I shall try to group them for purposes of 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


982 


982 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

convenience according to their substance. The clause may be discussed 
as also all the amendments and amendments to amendments. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : You may direct the office to circulate to us a 
consolidated list of all the amendments moved today as also on the 
previous occasion, so that we may have in a simplified form all the 
amendments for ready reference. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Though there are various lists of amendments, 
what is done is that they are put consecutively and, therefore, no further 
arrangement is necessary. As regards circulating the amendments moved 
today, I thought hon. Members would have noted them as I have done. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have also noted them. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Amendments to the same part of the clause may 
be at different places and for the sake of convenience it is better they 
are put in one place. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I shall ask the office to circulate a list containing 
the numbers of the amendments moved instead of once again repeating 
the amendments. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : It should be sub-clause by sub-clause. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Hon. Members have left their homes far away 
and come over here for parliamentary work. I do not believe the office 
should do it. Hon. Members should do it. Hon. Members may take one 
view and the office may take another view and does the hon. Member 
also want the Secretary to speak on his behalf in this matter ? As 
regards Pandit Malaviya’s amendment I shall allow it as an exception. 
With respect to other matters from tomorrow I would insist as a rule 
that I must have a copy of the amendment as also the Law Minister. 
Today perhaps hon. Members may not have had sufficient time to think 
about their amendments. Pandit Malviya may read out his amendment 
so that we may note it down. 

Pandit Malviya : I beg to move : to clause 2, add the proviso : 

“Provided further that notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this 
Act, no provision of this Act shall apply to anyone unless a referendum 
thereupon has been taken in the State to which he belongs and the 
Legislature of the State thereafter has decided in accordance with the 
result of the referendum that the provisions of this Act shall apply to 
the residents of the State. Further, that, thereafter, it shall be open to 
anyone to declare that he shall not be governed by this Act and the 
same shall then not apply to him.” 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


983 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 983 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : Sir, there are two points which I want to 
raise. It is a dilatory motion. The hon. Speaker has given a ruling during 
the last session.... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Hon. Members ought not to start off straightway, 
unless I call them. It may be a valid point... 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : It is a point of order. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : May be. The hon. Member should first stand 
up in her seat and I must call her. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It might come under clause 1. 

Pandit Malaviya : It is a matter of application and not a matter of 
extent. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Let it remain here as it is. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : Sir, there are two points which I want to 
raise. First of all this amendment which has just been dictated to this 
Parliament — a procedure which we have never known before — is of a 
dilatory character... 

Pandit Malaviya : Sir, I object to the word dilatory. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : This amendment is of a dilatory nature 
and the Speaker has given a ruling last time, if you will remember, on 
this. Secondly, I would like to know whether this procedure of dictating 
amendments to the House, while the Parliament waits is going to be a 
precedent which is going to be followed hereafter. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member too well knows that so far 
as dilatory motions are concerned, it is open to the House to discuss the 
amendments moved and throw them out, if the House is not inclined to 
accept them. I am prepared to adopt the advice of the hon. lady Member. 
I have not considered whether it is appropriate or relevant or irrelevant. 
I will take time to do so and if at any time before put it to the House. I 
find it is best to say that it is not relevant and therefore does not arise. 
I will do so. I will reserve my judgement so far as that is concerned. 

As regards dictation, we have been accustomed to taking small 
sentences but I never expected it to be a long sentence and therefore I 
submitted myself to his dictation. Let us now go on. Let me place this 
before the House. 

Amendment moved : 

To clause 2, add the proviso : 

“Provided further that notwithstanding anything to the contrary 

in this Act, no provision of this Act shall apply to any one unless 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


984 


984 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a referendum thereupon has been taken in the State to which he belongs 
and the Legislature of the State thereafter has decided in accordance 
with the result of the referendum that the provisions of this Act shall 
apply to the residents of the State. Further, that, thereafter, it shall 
be open to anyone to declare that he shall not be governed by this Act 
and the same shall then not apply to him.” 

Pandit Malaviya : May I make a request ? It is a very serious matter 
which we are considering.... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. member will have an opportunity... 

Pandit Malaviya : I wanted to draw your attention to the fact that 
unless we are all careful enough to use language with a certain amount 
of restraint we are likely to waste the time of the House and waste our 
energy. I should like to take objection, with your permission, to the use 
of the word dilatoriness for this reason :one Member may have one view, 
another may have another view. But if we feel that a certain thing should 
be done and if we wish to say it, the task becomes rather difficult if it 
is said that we are dilatory. I think we should be careful in this matter. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have appealed to hon. members, the same 
appeal I will repeat: hon. Members ought not to be too sensitive. “Dilatory” 
is an absolutely parliamentary word. Hon. Members may be anxious to 
get through this measure. It is not merely throwing any slur on hon. 
Members — there are some dilatory motions and there are some motions 
of substance. Therefore, it is quite a parliamentary expression. But I 
will appeal to all sections of the House. (We are engaged in a very holy 
cause.) This is a question of Hindu Law and the questions before us 
relate to marriage and other things. Let us address ourselves with all 
seriousness to this problem. We can iron out the differences and not 
only create a meeting place here but also give a lead to the rest of the 
country which is the intention of Parliament to give so far as this matter 
is concerned. Therefore, I hope the best of cheer will prevail here and 
with good humour we will get into the clauses. Though apparently any 
particular amendment may be unpalatable at the beginning, let us hear 
and reserve our judgment. That is my humble appeal to all sections in 
the House. No heat ought to be allowed to enter into this controversy. 
Let us keep our heads cool. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : May I ask your advice, Sir 

Dr. Ambedkar : Why do you seek advice so often ? 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : Just now you were pleased to address 
Shrimati Renuka Ray as madam. Has any Member got the right to be 
addressed by the Chair like that ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


985 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 985 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am sorry. I would like to be corrected. I do 
not like any Member to be addressed by any other Member in the first 
person. Similarly I will not address any Member directly. I shall try to 
be careful, but these things need not be pointed out to me. Now let us 
proceed. We have had too much of advice. 

The Minister of Home Affairs (Shri Rajagopalachari) : I take it, 
Sir, that in the last amendment the question of order is open ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : On all amendments. I merely placed that 
amendment for purposes of discussion. At any time it is open to the 
House or to me to consider it. 

Now, I shall give preference to those gentlemen who have moved the 
largest number of amendments, and so on in that order, and ultimately 
to those who have not moved any amendment at all and who want to 
speak. Those hon. Members who have already spoken on this will get a 
chance, if necessary, in the end. 

Shri Rajagopalachari : May I suggest one thing ? Those who promise 
and who believe they will make short speeches should be given preference. 

Hon. Members : No, no. 

Shri Rajagopalachari : And they may give way to others afterwards. 
If a member who wants to make a long speech is cut out by another we 
need not sympathise, but it is unfair that those who wish to speak for 
five minutes should be cut out by long speeches. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The suggestion that is given is certainly good, 
but I feel one difficulty. In the matter of resolutions of general discussion 
on a particular Bill, I can ordinarily give preference to those who want 
to speak for a short time so that there may be a number of members 
speaking on it. But with respect to amendments, hon. Members who have 
not tabled any amendment at all may occupy the time of the House. 

Shri Rajagopalachari : Without prejudice to other considerations I 
am suggesting it. Because, a closure may come at any time and those 
who may have something very important and brief may be cut out. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : How will we know beforehand 
whether a Member will make a long speech or a short speech ? 

Shri Rajagopalachari : This is a battle of the long and the short. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : We should only have a general indication that 
all Members will make it, as short as possible. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd MK SJ+YS 26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 986 

986 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Khwaja Inait Ullah : I wish to oppose some amendments, which 
were moved in the last session. 

Mr. Deputy-Speaker : Nobody prevents him. 

Shri Bharati (Madras) : His difficulty seems to be in regard to what 
you, Sir, have stated that those who have moved amendments will get 
preference. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have not said that I am going to cut it short. 
All will have an opportunity unless and until the House itself puts a 
ban upon them. I only indicated that hon. Members who have moved a 
number of amendments must be given preference. Others may also speak. 

*Dr. S. P. Mookerjee (West Bengal) : rose — 

Mr. Deputy-Speaker : Dr. Mookerjee — though he has not tabled any 
amendments. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : I happen to be one of those Members. . . 

Shri Rajagopalachari : It goes against all rules. . 

Dr. S. P. Mookerj ee : who have not tabled any amendment, nor 

have I, Sir, spoken on this momentous measure at any time since the 
Bill was introduced. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : He was a Minister at the time. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : Sir, we have met here after about seven 
months to take up consideration of the Hindu Code Bill. Many things 
have happened during this period. If I may say so, it is a matter of some 
satisfaction that Government has kept its mind open and has volunteered 
to make amendments in order to meet criticisms which may be made 
either in this House or outside. 

Shri Gadgil : Reasonable. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerj ee : I believe never in the history of our country 
has a measure given rise to so much criticism in support or against it. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : What about the abolition of sati ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : No, hon. Member need interrupt another hon. 
Member. I already said that it is likely to generate heat. Whatever *is 
not to the taste of any hon. Member ought not to be imposed upon any 
other hon. Member. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : The clause we are discussing now is of a 
general character. It raises the question of the applicability of the entire 
Code and from that point of view I should like to make some general 
observations which will be of a relevant character. 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 17th September 1951, pp. 2705-23. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


987 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 987 

The question has arisen as to whether this Code should be made 
applicable to Hindus as such or to such other classes of persons including 
Sikhs, Jains and Buddhists as have been mentioned in the amendment 
moved by the Hon. Law Minister. The question has also been raised 
whether the Code should not apply to all citizens of India. I know that 
this matter was raised on the floor of this House in February last and ‘I 
do not wish to dilate upon it very much but I would certainly say that 
as the Chapter in the Constitution dealing with the directive policy of 
the State indicates, Parliament under the new Constitution has really 
been called upon to pass a Code which is to be applied to all citizens — 
an all India Civil Code. When this bill was started to be discussed, we 
were working under a different set of circumstances altogether. It is 
therefore a matter of regret that the new Government even after the 
Constitution has been passed should proceed with a measure of this 
description applicable only to one section of the community. It is said that 
we are a secular State. In fact we suffer very often from a new disease 
which may be called ‘secularities’. How far is it open to Parliament — I 
am not raising any technical point — but how far is it desirable for 
Parliament to pass a law which will be applicable to only one section of 
the community ? I know what the reply of the law Minister is, because 
he dealt with this question in one of his previous speeches. He said 
that there was no difficulty in formulating an all India Civil Code if 
the country really wanted it. If that is the answer, then why not let us 
have such a Code ? I doubt very much if some of the provisions which 
have been suggested in this Code can be proposed to be made applicable 
to other communities, in particular to Muslims. We are discussing the 
question of monogamy, I believe it is nobody’s case that monogamy is 
good for Hindus alone or for Buddhists alone or for Sikhs alone. I believe 
those who are advocating monogamy honestly feel that this system is 
sound in principle and it should be made applicable to all — if not to 
all persons in this civilised world, at least to all citizens in India who 
are liable to be governed under laws passed by this Parliament. Now, 
why not have a separate Bill dealing only with monogamy and make it 
applicable to all citizens ? What is the objection thereto ? The objection 
thereto may come from quarters to which the Law Minister pointed his 
finger, I believe Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I am sufficiently troubled with one wife. 
I do not want two. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : The law Minister has got his answer. In any 
case, if a bill dealing with monogamy is introduced... 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


988 


988 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : A Bill to that effect has been 
introduced in this House by me. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : If such a Bill is introduced, at least the Law 
Minister will get support from Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad, but the real 
reason is that Government dare not touch the Muslim community. 

Shri Bharati : Why ? 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : You make a test. 

Shri Gadgil : Wait and see. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : I am making a suggestion. Let the Law 
Minister declare that the Bill will be amended and the portion dealing 
with monogamy will be applied to Muslims. 

Shri Rajagopalachari : Are we to make laws in order to test courage ? 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : Laws are sometimes made to test the sincerity 
of individuals and Government and therefore the sincerity and the 
partiality of the Government including the Home Minister are very 
much in question today. 

Shri Bharati : Not at all. 

Dr. Ambedkar : No, no. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : I am not going to tread on this question because 
I know the weaknesses of the promoters of the Bill. They dare not touch 
the Muslim community. There will be so much opposition coming not 
from men like Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad but from many others throughout 
India that Government will not dare to proceed with it. But of course 
you can proceed with the Hindu community in any way you like and 
whatever the consequences may be. 

Shri Rajagopalachari : Because we are the community. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : My appeal to the House and to the Government 
would be on a somewhat different basis. I do not wish to make my 
speech very controversial. 

Shri Kamath : Why not ? Make it as controversial as you can. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : Because I want to create that atmosphere 
where matters affecting social reform can be discussed in a method of 
give and take. It is not a Press Bill which the Law Minister is sponsoring 
on behalf of the Home Minister. We do not want the Police to stand 
outside this Parliament to help the smooth passage of a Bill dealing with 
social reform. That does not really help anybody. Any Bill whose object 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


989 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 989 

is to introduce social reform must have the support of the vast majority 
of the people of the country. I see the Home Minister rising. 

Shri Rajagopalachari : I am not interrupting, I am only helping 
him. My interruption has given a twist to the hon. Member’s argument. 
I was only objecting to the particular argument. I may be entirely in 
agreement if he proceeds on the other basis. 

An Hon. Member : So, you are a supporter ! 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : As the time of retirement from his office is 
drawing nearer and nearer sense also is dawning upon the Home Minister 
quicker and quicker. In any case, if we want to have social reforms in 
this country, we would like to carry as large sections of the people with 
us as possible. 

I do not share this view that parliament has no right to deal with 
matters of social reform. I know the sacredness of our ancient texts — 
Vedas, Smritis and Srutis. But historically there were commentators 
to interpret the great theories which are propounded by the original 
lawmakers in days of yore. Gradually, the commentators also disappeared 
and what we have witnessed during the last 150 years is that in many 
matters affecting social reform Judges including European Judges 
sitting in distant London and legislators have from time to time come 
forward and made alterations in the social structure of the country. So 
it is rather too late in the day for any one of us to say that Parliament 
should not now have the right to pass legislation which may interfere 
with the rights and privileges which may be enjoyed by the people of 
this country under the existing law. 

Pandit Maitra : Not this Parliament as constituted at present. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : So far as the right of this Parliament is 
concerned, naturally it is a very delicate matter. For me being a Member 
of this body it is rather difficult to challenge its jurisdiction, but of 
course so far as its right to present the will of the people goes, that is 
a matter which will be decided in the next few months and the people 
themselves will give their verdict. It is no use either for us sitting on 
this side or Members of Government sitting on the other side claiming 
for this Parliament things which may not be actually, honestly and 
legitimately claimed for this body. But my point is this that today there 
is a volume of opinion — a strong body of opinion, against some or many 
of the fundamental features of this Bill. I beg of hon. Members who are 
supporting this Bill to appreciate the depth of these criticisms. There 
may be some features in this Bill with which I am in agreement, but 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


990 


990 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I am trying to look at this measure from the point of view of those who 
are opposing it either in whole or in part. Just as we may appreciate the 
depth of the feelings of those who are supporting this measure, so also the 
depth of feelings of those who are opposing it must be appreciated. How 
to find a solution ? From the papers we find that for strategic reasons it 
has been decided to omit the consideration of some portions of this Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Strategic reasons ? 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : A sort of toss is supposed to have been taken. 
On the one side are marriage and divorce and on the other side is property 
and somehow marriage and divorce have won the day, and property has 
been relegated to the background for the time being. 

An Hon. Member : Property has won the day. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : Is it possible for us on the consideration of 
the amendments which are now before the House under clause 2 to 
devise some procedure whereby it may be left open to those who desire 
to come under the Code to take the fullest advantage of its provisions, 
and at the same time give freedom to those who do not believe in the 
sanctity or legality or justice of the provisions to continue to be governed 
by existing Hindu Law ? 

Shri Bharati : That is uniformity. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : That is a proposal which I am making in a 
perfectly relevant manner on the basis of the various amendments which 
you have ordered to be placed before the House for consideration. 

I have been told by some friends that we are liable to criticism for 
our backwardness in many foreign countries. During the last few days I 
have been told that some people have come and said that in China they 
are watching when the Hindu Code Bill will be passed ! 

Pandit Maitra : In Honolulu too ! 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : In America some people are supposed to be 
watching as regards the progressive nature of the Indian people in 
relation to their attitude towards the Hindu Code. 

Shri Gadgil : Old rishis are watching from Heaven also. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : That I consider to be an entirely irrelevant 
consideration. Let us look at the American laws. I was trying to get 
some information with regard to the American laws. I find that in 
26 different States in America they do not allow marriage between 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


991 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 991 

Americans and Negroes and even they go to the length of indicating the 
fraction of African blood which will negative any marriage between an 
American and Negro. In some States marriage between an American 
and Chinese is prohibited, or a marriage between an American and a 
Mongolian. In practically all the States there are different marriage laws. 
Somebody interrupted me just now — what about uniformity ? I suppose 
people of the United States of America are getting on quite merrily and 
quite well without having complete uniformity of all marriage laws. 
So uniformity is not the last word on the subject. Uniformity suggests 
stagnation, deadness... 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : rose — 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : and I suppose even Mrs. Renuka Ray 

has not reached that stage. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : Should we follow America ? 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : I am not saying that you should follow America. 
I would suggest that we should follow the lead given by our own country 
and that is the lead which Mrs. Ray should follow and which she has 
not followed as yet. 

That is so with regard to America. Now take again the Roman 
Catholics. According to their strict law, according to their religion, 
divorce is not allowed. But in almost all countries they have passed 
civil laws which allow Roman Catholics to adopt divorce if necessary. 
But they have not touched their religion. They have allowed that to 
remain separate, but those among the Roman Catholics who desire to 
be governed in accordance with the civil laws, it is open to them to 
do so. Well, Dr. Ambedkar is nodding his head. It is difficult to know 
whether it is in approval or dissent. In any event, he can explain later 
on — I am open to correction. It is very difficult to get these Jaws. But 
whatever books are available in the Parliament Library I was trying 
to go through them and I find that a clear distinction is made between 
the two systems. 

Now we are confining ourselves for the present to marriage and 
divorce. What is it that is worrying the so-called progressives in this 
country, including progressive ladies? 

Shri Kamath : In the House or outside ? 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : They are anxious that there should be a 
provision for divorce and there should be provision for monogamy. 
These are the two things on which great stress has been laid. Now let 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


992 


992 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

us take divorce for the time being. You have got your laws passed by 
the Indian Legislature which permit divorce. At one stage a Hindu could 
not get married under the civil law, unless he declared that he was not 
a Hindu. Even that has been changed. A Hindu may remain a Hindu 
and at the same time contract a marriage which will be according to 
his taste or that of the couple. Similarly, with regard to inter-caste 
marriage, you have already passed laws and made such inter-caste 
marriages permissible, without taking away the Hindu character of the 
persons involved. Even sagotra marriage which is considered to be very 
revolting by large sections of the people has been recognised by laws 
passed by Parliament. 

Dr. Tek Chand : By the previous Parliament. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : By the Legislative Assembly. 

These are indications as to how the demand for a progressive 
development — if I may say so — of marriage laws has been mat by 
Legislatures of this country. This is a subject which is placed in our 
Constitution in the Concurrent List and I believe Bombay and Madras 
have passed laws on the subject. (An Hon. Member : Mysore as well). 
There are several States where provincial laws have been passed in 
some form or another. (An Hon. Member : Not in North India) making 
provisions which are consistent with the wishes of the people. Now the 
point is this. Why do you wish to make the new laws obligatory upon 
all Hindus ? You do not wish that the system of divorce should be taken 
advantage of or must be taken advantage of, by people against the will 
of the parties concerned. It is an enabling measure and that power is 
already in existence. 

On the other hand, what is the blow that you are giving at the feelings 
of million of people ? Now you have kept this form of sacramental 
marriage on paper. You have changed its description from sacramental 
to “dharmic” in order to give it a little oriental and attractive colouring. 
Of course the substance has not changed. I would ask very seriously 
those Members of the House who are supporting this Bill : What is it 
that you are achieving by this proposal ? 

So far as sacramental marriage goes, this is an ideology which 
lies deep-rooted in the minds of millions of people — educated, and 
uneducated, literate and illiterate — the indissoluble nature of Hindu 
marriage. That is a matter of religion : it is not a matter of mere body 
and flesh. Now that is a feeling which lies deep in the minds of millions 
of people and I have talked to many people not only in my own province 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


993 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 993 

but in verious parts of India. People who have not the remotest chance 
of taking advantage of any divorce law for various reasons are simply 
shocked at this idea and many people who are well-intentioned, who 
are reformers suggest that if there are Hindus in the country today 
who want to take advantage of the modern system of divorce or want 
to do away with the religious nature of Hindu marriage, there is 
enough opportunity given to them under the existing law. If, however, 
the law has to be revised in order to make them ultra-modern and 
completely up-to-date, let the law be revised for their benefit. But why 
do away with the fundamental and sacred nature of Hindu marriage ? 
What is it that you gain thereby ? I have not been able to get any 
satisfactory answer to this question. Because it is nobody’s case that 
the new methods which are being laid down will be compulsorily 
adopted by all Hindus. Obviously that is nobody’s case. Therefore, if 
option is given and if people take advantage of that option, naturally 
your case is won. 

I was told that even in India, as India is today, there are nearly 
about 90 per cent, among Shudras amongst whom some form or 
other of divorce or dissolution of marriage exists. Very well, then 
the answer is there. You have got your Hindu Law which provides 
for the dissolution of marriage in castes and communities where it is 
wanted. You may say, well, why should about 10 or 15 per cent, of the 
Indian population stand against these changes ? It is not a question 
of anybody’s standing against the changes. If you want to go ahead 
or go backwards — whatever it may be — you are welcome to do so. 
But why drag others who do not believe in you and also who believe 
in something which is perfectly morally justifiable and in accordance 
with the highest standards of human conduct ? I have not been able 
to get any answer to this fundamental question. 

We are told very often that our system is backward. I have got with 
me many extracts from the writings of great Indians and great Western 
scholars who have admired at the way in which Hindu society has 
carried on its existence in spite of tremendous odds and difficulties. 
I am not for a moment saying that all is well with Hindu society. I 
know where the defects lie. But it is something amazing, something 
unprecedented that our religion or the great truths on which Hindus 
for generations past, for thousands of years, have lived, somehow 
have shown a degree of adaptability and vitality which is hardly to 
be witnessed anywhere else. What is the reason ? The reason is that 
whatever truths were propounded by the ancient sages or rishis, or 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


994 


994 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

commented upon by those who came after them, were not dogmatic 
in character. Just as the needs of the society changed, so also 
the laws were altered. In a huge country like India which is one 
politically today — and we would undoubtedly like to see that it 
grows politically, socially, culturally and economically as one solid 
nation — at the same time, we cannot forget that in this country 
dwell thousands and thousands of people in various parts, in towns 
and in villages, men educated, uneducated, men with vision and 
with no vision and they have built up a structure of their own 
consistent with individual and social progress and welfare. Somehow 
that society has developed. Do you find any other country in this 
world where in spite of tremendous onslaughts the social structure 
has remained one ? 

India passed through seven hundred years of Muslim rule. 
Now, many theories were propounded during that period which 
in the context of today’s circumstances may appear to be rather 
conservative. But they were dictated by considerations for the 
preservation and consolidation of the society as such, and that is 
how those particular principles were propounded by the masters 
who were in no circumstance less qualified to speak on matters with 
which they dealt than any of us sitting in this Parliament today. 

From time to time movements came into this country. Reference 
has been made to Brahmo Samaj to Arya Samaj as soon as it 
appeared that the society was becoming stagnant, was becoming 
conservative, some outstanding personality raised his head in 
this land and drew upon the great sources, the fountain head of 
Indian knowledge, the Vedas or the Upanishads, gave their own 
interpretation and thereby tried to check the growth of the evils 
of conservatism or the moral decay of the society. But what has 
happened today ? The ideology for which the Brahmo Samaj stood 
in this country, say, about a hundred years ago has practically been 
absorbed by the Hindu society as you call the Hindu society today. 

The other day we were discussing about Buddhism, a matter 
on which Dr. Ambedkar naturally would be the best authority 
to speak in view of his latest transformation to that religion. 
But in any case some friends from outside India came, I have 
something to do with the Maha Bodhi Society. I happen to be its 
President. (An Hon. Member-. Are you a Buddhist ?) without being 
a Buddhist. I am a Hindu and yet I am its President, because 
I have liberality enough to admit the greatness of Buddhism 
and yet remain a Hindu. The point I was about to develop 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


995 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 995 

was this. There were friends who came from outside India and they asked 
with a tone of complaint. “Well, India was the land of birth of Buddha, 
but India killed Buddhism”. I do not wish to go into those controversial 
matters now. But one point comes out very prominently and that is that 
when Buddha started preaching his great doctrines India needed Buddha, 
not only to save the world but to save India. And Buddha succeeded in 
checking the growth of certain tendencies which were about to destroy 
the very life-blood of Hindu civilization Buddha has been absorbed by 
the same Hindus as an avtar. Although there were people in India who 
fought with Buddhism — whether they were right or wrong is a matter 
into which I need not enter now — but gradually it was realized that 
Buddhism was a factor of growth on Indian soil and had to be absorbed 
in Indian culture. 

Shri Gadgil : The same thing will happen to the Code. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : Far from it. That is a paradise that my friend 
is creating where he may dwell for ever. 

So far as Buddhism is concerned it went and spread in other countries 
but the tenets of Buddhism were gradually absorbed in Hindu ideology 
.The reason why I am saying all this is to show that we should never 
tolerate any criticism from any quarter, especially from a foreign quarter 
when they say that Hindu civilization or Hindu culture has been of a 
static nature or of a stagnant nature or of a decadent nature. There is 
something in our culture and civilization which is of a dynamic character 
and which has lived from generation to generation. Even when India 
was a subject nation people were bom in this country, men of our soil, 
who stood up for great ideals which gave a new lease of life under new 
and modern conditions to the eternal tenets of Hindu civilization. This 
code is destroying that fountain-source. I shudder to think of the effect 
of cause 4. You read clause 4 of the Hindu Code. You are closing the 
door there. You are saying that except such manners or customs which 
might have been recognized in the body of this Code, everything else 
will be taboo from today. And my friend Mr. Gadgil says that this will 
be another Code of a modern Buddha or Manu or something like that 
(An Hon. Member: What a fall !) It is these manners and customs based 
upon the ancient ideology, which allowed the Hindu society to grow and 
prosper from time to time. 

12 Noon 

Today, this great Assembly — and all of us are honourable and learned 
men — is solemnly deciding that we are the: fountain-head of Indian 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


996 


996 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

religion and Indian culture and whatever we decide to embody 
in this Code is final for the time being and nothing else will be 
allowed to be looked into by Judges and Courts. Does not the House 
know that even in 1951 after the attainment of Independence, our 
own Supreme Court had to draw from the original texts or their 
interpretations and give their verdict on cases where questions of 
Hindu law were under consideration, because they could not get any 
analogy from judicial decisions or text-books ? You are killing today 
the very fountain source of your religion which had given such a 
wide scope to generations of people to make it a living reality and 
you say that it is a forward measure : it is a backward measure ; 
it is a measure which does not help anybody at all ; it only helps 
in dividing the country. I do not wish to ascribe any motive to 
anybody. Anyone who may be supporting it or proposing it may be 
acting with the highest motives. I am prepared to admit that but 
what I would like to say is this : Do not give compulsory effect to 
the provisions in respect of all people. (An Hon. Member : Where 
is the compulsory effect at all ?) Divorce is not compulsory but the 
breaking away of the sacramental ties of Hindu marriage will be 
compulsory and that is bad enough. Whether divorce comes or not is 
a different question altogether ; you are violently changing customs 
and convictions. Somebody said, when I was speaking earlier that 
south India was specially progressive and many of the laws which 
we are considering are already in existence there today. I say 
good luck to south India. Let south India proceed from progress to 
progress from divorce to divorce. I have absolutely no quarrel with 
south India, but why force it on others who do not want it. In fact 
I have got a letter with me. I received it only two days ago — it is 
a postcard and I do not know the gentleman who wrote it. 

Shri Gadgil : From the Dead Letter Office ? 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : It is not from the Dead Letter Office. I 
can make a present of it to Mr. Gadgil, if he likes. It is not a dead 
letter. This only shows how customs vary in this country. Here is 
this gentleman who writes from Nuzwid, Kistna district. 

“The Bill as published on the Hindu Law contains a provision 
rendering the marriages between a girl and her maternal uncle 
void as being within the prohibited degree. The aforesaid custom 
is widely prevalent in Andhra and Tamil Nad and even Brahmins 
consider maternal uncles of girls to be the most eligible and suitable 
bridegrooms for their girls. The prohibition is not known perhaps 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


997 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 997 

to lawyers and to others. I am sure that the vast majority of our people 
are ignorant of it, in which case marriages celebrated in ignorance of 
this provision would operate as a severe hardship. I therefore request 
you to move an amendment ” 

I do not know why they had selected me in particular and not 
written to Dr. Ambedkar — 

“... saving the custom from the prohibition or fixing suficient time 
to elapse before the chapter on marriage, can be brought into force.” 

This is just by the way, for those who were talking about the 
progressive nature of the people living in those territories. Naturally 
they have gone very far ahead. {An hon. Member : Is it true ?) I 
do not know whether the letter came from the Dead Letter Office 
but my friends from south India can tell me whether it is genuine 
{Interruption) . I shall refer the writer to Mr. Bharati in my reply. 
The point which I am developing is this. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : It is not a progressive State. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerj ee : Those who may follow him may consider 
it absolutely progressive. It is only a point of view. I am not 
challenging the wisdom or un wisdom of any State. It might have 
been followed by lakhs and millions of people in this vast country. 
Naturally customs might have developed in a particular manner. My 
proposal boils down to this. You do not make this Code applicable 
to all — I am talking of marriage and divorce for the time being — 
but leave it open to those who will be married in future to make a 
declaration that they would like to be governed by these provisions 
and not be governed by the consequences of dharmic marriage ; you 
leave it open to them to do so. {An hon. Member : What about past 
marriages ?) That covers the cases of those who come in future. 
We are not legislating. I suppose for the purpose of helping the 
dissolution of marriage of the existing Members of Parliament. We 
are looking to the future ; we are thinknig of handing over something 
to the future generation, whereby they can live in peace and with 
greater comfort. But supposing you want to apply it to those who 
are already married.... 

Dr. Ambedkar : It does not apply to those who are already 
married. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : There also you can make a provision. 
Supposing you want to apply it to all who are already married, there I 
will give a solution. You leave it open to anybody, say, within a period 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


998 


998 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of one or two years to register his decision whether he would like to 
be governed by this Code to opt for it, if you can use that language. 
(An hon. Member : Why not everywhere ?) Well, ‘everywhere ‘I do not 
approve for this reason that you are deciding something for others for 
which you have no right today. You are passing a law whereby you are 
saying that the dharmic form of marriage will continue as now without 
any modification or alteration and the other form of marriage also is 
open to people who would like to take advantage of it. Let the people in 
future make their choice. There is no compulsion and for existing people 
you may give a time-limit or you may not give a time-limit. You can say 
that if any particular party desires to be governed by the provisions of 
this Code, such persons may make a declaration before the Registrar 
or Registrar-General or Director General or whoever he may be and get 
the relief as is provided for in the Code. I ask in all seriousness what 
is it that you lose thereby ? 

Pandit Kunzru (Uttar Pradesh): What do we gain thereby ? 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : What you gain thereby is that you do not 
break the unity of the country. 

Pandit Kunzru : This Act when passed will be permissive. It does 
not compel any couple to take advantage of the provisions of divorce. It 
is perpetually open to a couple to say whether they are to be governed 
by that provision or not. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : That is a point of view which maybe urged 
with some emphasis. Here the difference is this : that you destroy the 
indissoluble nature of Hindu marriage which is regarded as solemn and 
sacred by millions of people. Pandit Kunzru may not agree and many 
people in this House may not. I am not quarrelling with those people 
who believe that marriage is bilateral arrangement, that it is nothing 
but a matter of contract; I have nothing to say against them if there are 
people who hold that view. Let them hold it, but there are those who 
hold the contrary view, who genuinely and sincerely believe that this 
system which has been in vouge for thousands of years is something 
sacred, something deep-rooted in their traditions and religion. What 
right have you to sit in this House and say that you want by one stroke 
of the pen to take this great right away ? That is my answer to Pandit 
Kunzru. (Shri Bharati : Monogamy.) I am coming to it. Shri Bharati 
need not be anxious I hope he is agreeing with me as regards divorce 
and that is why he wants me to go to monogamy. That is my line of 
approach. Believe me, rightly or wrongly, this country has been divided 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


999 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 999 

tremendously on this Hindu Code Bill. I do not wish that that should 
be so. I want that we should go on progressing and making reforms 
in our social structure. But, we will do it in such a way that we can 
carry the bulk of the people with us, not carry them by force in this 
House or carry them by threads of sweeping agitation outside, but 
carry them by appealing to their logic and to their conviction. When 
I discussed this matter with representatives of the orthodox school 
of view 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is Karapatriji. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : No ; I have not met him recently. 

Pandit Maitra : What is the harm if he is consulted ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : No harm. I invited him and he expressed a desire 
to come. Afterwards, he refused to come. I have not shunned him. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : I have not discussed this matter with 
Karapatriji rcently. I shall not be sorry to discuss it with him ; but, 
I have not discussed. 

Dr. Ambedkar : In fact; I invited him to come and discuss ; but 
he has not come. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : I have discussed this matter with many 
people who represent his point of view and others who are not 
orthodox. Somehow, the country is divided today. How to proceed in 
the matter ? As I said, it is not a Press law, that something is in 
danger and so you must go and pass the Press law somehow and 
operate it. This is not an amendment of the Constitution. It is not 
a political matter. In fact, we may differ on matters of politics. But, 
there should be a fundamental agreement with regard to the need 
for introducing reforms into our great country, which will make our 
civilisation more progressive and more advanced. That should be our 
common ground of approach. Those who are following the existing 
practices, those who are abiding by the ; provisions of the existing 
laws are not retrograde. The tragedy is that many of the supporters 
of the Bill, who have been carried away by their notions of so-called 
progress and advance, in their exuberance think that what they think 
is the last word on the subject, that they represent progress and the 
others are retrograde. That is very unfortunate. (An Hon. Member : 
Lipstick). I am not talking about lipstick at all; I have talked about 
progress. We should see the other man’s point of view, the point 
of view of man who believe in the existing ideology, unless it can 
be pointed out that something is happening in the society which 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


26-10-2013>YS>25-12-2013 


1000 


1000 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is absolutely rotten, immoral, backward. If that could be pointed out. 
I am at one with Dr. Ambedkar and those who want to introduce 
reforms. But, if it is a mere difference of opinion, a mere difference 
in outlook, and you get whatever you want for those who share your 
point of view, why then do your force your opinions on millions of 
others, who do not share your view ? That is a point of view which 
I would very strongly urge before the Law Minister and Governmet. 
If I had given you a formula which indicated an abandonment of the 
provisions of the Code for those who believe in it, you can blame me. 
But, I wish you godspeed ; go ahead ; do whatever you like for those 
people who believe in the ideology which you are preaching here. 
But in respect of others who and whose forefathers had proceeded 
in accordance with the old traditions and Who are no less patriotic 
Indians than any one who is sponsoring this bill, why do you force 
your options on them ? 

Talking of divorce has the law of divorce solved all social problems 
in countries where the system of divorce is now in existence ? 

Shri Himatsingka (West Bengal) : Created more. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : I have been going through some of the recent 
bookson sociology. People are perturbed, because this is a complex 
human problem. The word has not found a solution to these problems. 
Those who have taken to the system of divorce, their number is leaping 
up. Do they find peace ? Have they found happiness ? 

An Hon. Members : No. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : On the other hand new problems have 
come up. Read some of the latest books on psycho-analysis. There it 
is clearly pointed out that many of the evils which face the western 
countries are due to the mal-adjustment of the sexes. These are 
complex problems. Why blindly copy something from the west because 
some people from some part of the world have come and told you 
that. You are backward unless you adopt this ? If there are forward 
people in this country, who believe in this ideology, give them a long 
rope, sufficiently long, so that they may hang themselves. But, do 
not interfere with others who have found a solution of their problems 
through different doors altogether. 

So far as monogamy is concerned. I shall support it with one 
reservation. Make it applicable to all the citizens of India. It is not 
a question that monogamy is good for the Hindus and monogamy is 
not good for others. Stand for one social doctrine. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1001 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1001 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Why force it on those who do not 
believe in it ? 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : If you believe that monogamy as a social 
system is the best that India should have, then, do not try to look at 
it through the Hindu door ; look at it through the human door and 
make it applicable to all. Behave like a secular State at least in this 
instance. Take courage in both hands and say that monogamy will be 
made applicable to all citizens of India. If you cannot do it, do not do it 
for one section alone. Here, we are living in days of statistics. We swear 
by stastics, either real or manufactured. I have been trying to get some 
information : I could not. I wanted to know how many people in India 
have been marrying a second time. 

Shri Himatsingka : Or, keeping two wives at the same time. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : That is what I mean : marrying a second wife 
when the first is alive. The number is extremely small. It is really no 
problem. Already, on account of advanced views, society has adjusted 
itself and on account of economic conditions, general public censure 
etc., this system has gone out. Why make a parade of this that you are 
introducing a great reform and legislating for this ? If you accept it as 
a principle, apply it, as I said just now to the whole of India. 

So far as the Hindu Code Bill is concerned. I do not know what the 
decision is going to be. The Prime Minister has indicated that most likely 
we will not proceed with the rest of the Bill and time may not permit us 
to do so I am prepared to make this offer. Pass the entire Hindu Code 
as it is ; only make it optional. Those who want it can adopt it. I have 
spoken to representatives belonging to the extreme orthodox school of 
view ; I have argued with them. Although there are some amongst them 
who are against the passing of any such Bill whatsoever they also realise 
that just as they claim to think for themselves, others also must have 
the liberty to do so for themselves and for their future. That would be a 
splendid beginning. I am prepared to admit, however much there may be 
opposition to the Code, that this represents a marvellous piece of work 
on the part of Dr. Ambedkar and those who have been associated with 
him. I am quite prepared to admit that this is a most throny subject - 
and he has gone through the matter with as much ability as any one 
could have. For that, if he is prepared to accept an honorary degree to 
be conferred by Parliament, we are prepared to confer a degree on Dr. 
Ambedkar. But if you look upon it as a measure which has to be pushed 
down the throat of millions of Hindus who are opposed to it. I say that 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1002 


1002 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

you will not be doing a service to the people of India. The only 
way in which you can proceed even at this late stage is this. Let 
us not quarrel amongst ourselves ; let us agree to differ on this 
fundamental issue. If you are prepared to point out that there are 
certain matters which are immediately anti-social, or corroding into 
the very life of Hindu society, let us agree to make such provisions 
compulsory if there are any. Othewise, this new great structure 
which you have prepared, keep it there for a few years and say 
that any one, whether a Hindu or not, any Indian citizen, who 
desires to accept it can make a declaration, and the provisions 
regarding marriage or divorce or property, whatever it is, will be 
applicable to such selectors. That would be the beginning of a great 
era. For after all, who is going to decide ultimately ? your elections 
are coming. You then go forward. As the Prime Minister has said, 
his sweeping wind will come and blow away all opponents and 

Shri Kamath: Whirlwind. 

Dr. S. P. Mookerjee : Yes, the whirlwind will come. Let the 
whirlwind come with regard to the provisions of the Hindu Code 
Bill. Let them go and convince the people and tell them that they 
are not forcing it on them. Let them say, “we give you the option. 
Here is a heaven we have created. Come into this heaven and attain 
moksha”. Go and explain to the people and if they feel that it is 
really such a heaven and not a dilli-ka-laddu they will come and 
take it, and take it with open hearts. There will be ample time. 
After all, Hindu civilisation has existed for thousands of years, in 
spite of on slaughts from various quarters, cultural, political and 
economic invasions and so on. We have survived all that and we 
are now a free country, and we propose to survive with a much 
more glorious future than we had attained in the past. But when 
you introduce social reforms in such a vast country as this, where 
opinions differ, where attitudes differ and where ideologies differ, 
then the only way in which you can do it is to go at a slow pace. 
I am not asking you to abandon principles which you believe to 
be true. I am not asking that for the time being. But please go 
and convince the people, the Hindu people who still claim to live 
under canons and codes which are in no way inferior to those 
existing in any other part of the world. Give them scope to choose 
for themselves. That is my appeal to the House and to Government 
and I hope that appeal will be heeded to. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1003 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1003 

*Shri B. K. P. Sinha : A cruel destiny always pits me against 
Dr. Mookerjee, one of the greatest orators in the House and in the 
country. Dr. Mookerjee and other opponents of this Bill have brought 
forward the suggestion. “Why not have a Civil Code ? Why not extend 
the scope of this Bill to cover all the castes and communities and 
religious groups in India ?” And also they ask., “Why not leave it to 
the different states or different people to adopt the various provisions 
of this Bill?” The mover of the Bill has effectively replied to these 
criticisms. The opponents of the Bill have also referred to the clause in 
the Constitution regarding discrimination between different persons. 
It was their contention that in view of that clause, or in view of 
that arricle of the Constitution. If you have provisions in the Bill 
applicable only to one community, that will not be constitutionally 
valid. In that connection they also referred to certain decisions of 
some Bombay courts and Madras courts. But they were decisions 
of the lower courts and since then the Bombay High Court has 
pronounced that in the cases referred to there was no violation of the 
discrimination article in the Constitution and that in spite of that 
article we can have laws for the Hindu community, to the exclusion 
of other communities. Therefore, that point is settled. 

Then there is the question of leaving it to the different States or 
people to decide by referendum. What are the grounds on which they 
have advanced this argument ? They say that the provisions of the 
Bill conflict with the fundamental tenets of Hindu law, that they 
are revolutionary and that they bring about far-reaching changes in 
the law, and that these changes are not at all essential. These are 
the arguments advanced by them in support of their contention. Let 
me scan the provisions of the Bill and see what is the substance of 
their contention. I will for the present confine myself to the question 
of marriage and divorce, for that is the only chapter that is going 
to be discussed. 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava (Ajmer): Kindly confine yourself to 
clause 2. 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : Yes. I confine myself to clause 2 and I will 
illustrate my statements only from marriage and divorce chapter. I 
will not go beyond that. What are the features of this chapter ? It has 
four features. One that it widens the scope within which one can have 
marriages. You can go beyond the particular sub-caste or group and 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 17th September 1951, pp 2723-32. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1004 


1004 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

still the marriage will not be illegal and the children will not be 
illegitimate. Secondly, this Bill restricts or narrows down the field of 
prohibition. There were many prohibitions. One could not go beyond 
certain castes. One could not have marriage within the same gotra or 
pravara and with certain relations which fell within certain degrees 
from the father and mother. This bill narrows these prohibitions. And 
then it introduces the principle of monogamy, and lastly it introduces 
the principle of divorce. 

First of all, there is this widening of the Field of marriage. Are 
the provisions of this measure really in conflict with the principles 
of Hindu Law and Hindu religion ? In my opinion they are not. 
Dr. Mookerjee said that this measure offends the orthodox people, that 
it offends their religious sentiments, their religious susceptibilities. I 
am not ashamed to admit that I consider myself as much an orthodox 
Hindu as anyone else. Have I not very often met Dr. Mookerjee 
on the banks of the Ganges when we went there for our bath. We 
have also often met in the temple of Lord Shiva at Banaras. Our 
orthodoxy is of the same character and of the same extent. Still I 
do not find anything in this Bill that wounds my religious feelings 
or susceptibilities. What was the pristine or original condition of 
Hindu society ? That we see in the texts of the Mahabharata and 
other scriptures. There were no caste distinctions then as they exist 
now. Then there were divisions according to the work. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Every man is a Shudra by birth. It 
is by the sacraments that he becomes a Brahmin. 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : But due to certain adverse factors things 
changed. Well, I do not want to quote and prolong the discussion, 
otherwise I will be playing your game. Well, as I was saying, there 
were no distinctions as they exist now. Every Arya was free to marry 
any other Arya. You know that Anuloma and Pratiloma marriages 
were permitted by Hindu law. And in adopting the provisions of this 
measure. I am sure that we are reverting to the old order of things. 
But that old order was disturbed by certain unfortunate developments 
in the country. 

Pandit Malaviya : Will the hon. Member please elaborate that 
point a bit ? 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : I have elaborated it sufficiently. We will 
have to talk for seven days if we are to give enough elaborations. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1005 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1005 

Pandit Malaviya : I want to learn. I want to understand things and 
what the hon. Member says. I want to know where Pratiloma marriages 
were allowed in India. 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : You will find in any book on Hindu Laws that 
Anuloma and Pratiloma marriges were common. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Anuloma marriages were allowed and not 
Pratiloma marriages. 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : It was not allowed. The children were known 
as chandalas but they formed a branch of the Hindu society. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : All that has been settled by Acts of Parliament. 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : There are so many Acts of Parliament in this 
regard such as the Special Marriage Act of 1872, the Hindu Marriage 
Validation Act of 1949 allowing marriages between Hindus, Sikhs and 
Jains and also between different castes and sub-castes then there is the 
Hindu Marriage (Removal of Disabilities) Act which allows marriage 
between sub-divisions of the same caste. So these Acts are there and 
they are of an all-India character and it is open to any Hindu to marry 
any other Hindu, Sikh or Jain. What we are doing here is simply re- 
enacting the old laws. Dr. Mookerjee asked if the laws are there, why 
re-enact them here ? I would put it to him that if they are there what 
crime are we committing by re-enacting them in the Hindu Code ? 

Then I come to the second feature; restricting or narrowing the field 
of prohibition. Under the Hindu Marriage (Removal of Disabilities) Act, 
is it not true that Sagotra and Sapravara marriages are permitted and 
that nothing new is introduced in this Code ? This provision is already 
a part of the Hindu law. In the Hindu society it was only amongst the 
Brahmins, strictly speaking, that Sagotra marriage was taboo. To the 
Kshatrias and Vaishyas Gotra had a spiritual or religious significance 
only. Gotra did not mean to them that they were descended from the 
same ancestor. Only in the case of the Brahmins the sameness of Gotra 
meant that they were descended from the same ancestor. In the case of 
the Shudras Sagotra marriage was always permitted. Whether under 
the law as it was or as it is, we find that Sagotra marriages were legal 
and valid and that is only being incorporated in this Code. 

Another restriction introduced is that the field of prohibition is being 
narrowed, in the case of the father’s side to five and in the case of the 
mother’s side to three generations. So far as the Hindu law and the 
practice and customs prevalent in this country are concerned there is 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1006 


1006 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

not much of a uniformity. Many commentators advocated seven and five 
prohibitions : others have advocated five and three prohibitions. They 
thought it was not necessary to go beyond five and three prohibitions. 
In the Yajur Veda the restriction is three and two and in certain Vedic 
texts it does not go beyond two. In this Bill it is my contention that 
we are only reverting to the old order, the Hindu law as it was in the 
beginning before it became contaminated with contact with others. 

(Shri Himatsingka in the Chair) 

As regards the principle of monogamy, under the Hindu law as practised 
today the Hindu woman shall have only one spouse. 

Shri Kamath : One living spouse. 

Shri B. K. P. Sniha : Living, or dead also. 

Shri Kamath : One can have one dead and one living. 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : In certain cases one only, living or dead. 

So far as males are concerned, there is a misconception that the 
Hindu law allows polygamy. But I find that there are certain texts of 
Yajnavalkya, Manu and Apasthambha which ordain and lay down that a 
Hindu can have a second wife only in certain well-defined circumstances. 
When the relevant clauses come up before the House I will quote the 
shlokas and the texts. 

Pandit Malaviya : Do you suggest that ? 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : I do not. Now Bombay and Madras have passed 
legislation laying down that there shall be monogamy. This principle of 
monogamy has been recognised for Hindus in the Special Marriages Act 
and in the Civil Marriages Act. I find that this principle, that it is salutary 
to strick to one spouse has been recognised indirectly by the Married 
Women’s (Separate Residence and Maintenance) Act which recognises 
that a married woman can get separate residence and maintenance if the 
husband goes in for another wife or a concubine. It has been recognised 
that oneness of a spouse is slautary. Any deviation from it is bad and 
in that case the woman is allowed the right of separate residence and 
maintenance. 

Shri Kamath : What about polyandry ? 

Shri. B. K. P. Sinha : Then I come to the other principle, divorce. 
Dr. Mookerjee was furious; he said that Hindu marriage was sacramental, 
indissoluble, immutable. There is no escape for a man who once 
commits a mistake in marrying a certain woman ! But I find from 
some of the old texts that Hindu marriage was not as immutable, as 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1007 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1007 

indissoluble as Dr. Mookerjee would claim. I would read out a text 
which tells us that even the woman has a right to go in for another 
husband. This is the text of Narada and Parashar: 

ysiRsirl ylrirl yryl I 

H I Tl J 1 1 xrfrR^fr I 

“Another husband is ordained for women in five calamities, namely, 

if the husband be unheard of or be dead, or adopt a religious order, 

or be impotent or become outcaste.” 

Pandit Malaviya : Will you kindly read also the commentary on 
that? 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha: I will leave it for you. 

So it was not as indissoluble as Dr. Mookerjee would like us to 
believe. There were provisions for dissolution of Hindu marriages in 
certain exceptional circumstances. Thereby, the principle of contract was 
recognised indirectly. Moreover, the Civil Marriage Act also recognises 
the principle of divorce and these authorities apart, in the modern age, 
in the present conditions of India, If we do not have a law of divorce 
for the Hindu society we must be prepared for the disintegration and 
the ultimate dissolution of the Hindu society. 

In this connection I am reminded of two or three cases which created 
such a furore in Bengal, the home province of Dr. Mookerjee. Hindu law 
as practised there does not leave any scope for divorce. I know at least 
of two cases in which the parties belonged to the Brahman caste. They 
were married. They led a happy life for some time. Thereafter, their 
life was unhappy. There was no escape for them. In both the cases, 
the wives went to a famous mosque at Calcutta and were converted to 
Islam and thereby they got the marriages dissolved. Society in India 
has reached such a stage that if you do not have a law of divorce 
you must be prepared for such incidents, I do not know whether Dr. 
Mookerjee by standing against this provision is doing any good to the 
cause of Hindus or like all fanatical champions he is doing positive 
harm to Hindu religion and Hindu society. 

Shri Chattopadhyay (West Bengal): Did they not later on become 
Hindus ? 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : At any rate, it is clear that if you want divorce 
you have to be converted to some other religion. I urge that only. 

There are many such cases where parties have adopted some other 
religion just for obtaining divorce. We must take note of advance and 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1008 


1008 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

progress. We must see the stage that society has reached. We are 
not living in an age when India had no contact with the outer world. 
We are living in an age when ideas have a knack of crossing the 
borders of countries. We are living in an age when certain theories 
of liberty and certain theories of freedom have crept into the minds 
of men and women, especially young men and women and, if we 
do not allow scope for the working of those ideas it is my fear 
that Hindus society as we know it today shall not long be able to 
maintain its existence. 

Then some of my friends urged that the provincial laws were 
there and why we should not leave the matter to the provincial 
governments. That is exactly the reason why I urge that we should 
have a Central law. Marriage, divorce, adoption, succession and 
inheritance form part of item 5 of the Concurrent List. It is open to 
any State Legislature to Legislate on any of these matters and some 
States have legislated. Supposing we do not legislate, what would be 
the consequence ? The consequence would be that custom, for which 
Dr. Mookerjee shed so many tears, would be abrogated in all the 
different provinces by the provincial legislations and then you would 
have statutory laws differing from each other in all the provinces. 
If custom is the only vehicle of progress and development, that 
vehicle will be destroyed and there would be rigid compartmentalised 
law-26 or 30 laws, in fact as many laws as there are provinces or 
States in India. I shudder to think what will be the effect of that 
on Hindu society and ultimately on the strength of the nation, for 
a stable and uniform society is an essential ingredient of a strong 
and stable nation. 

Then there is the question of inter-marriage. In previous times, 
people of one territory were born in their territories ; they grew up 
in their territories ; and they died in their territories. They were 
governed by the customs and usage of that territory. What do we 
find today ? In this Parliament, in the galleries of this Parliament, 
there are Members from all parts of the country. 

Shri Kamath : On a point of order — can the galleries be referred to? 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : I am not addressing the galleries. If I can 
talk of the country, I can as well talk of the galleries. 

Residents of various parts of the country are assembled here. Not 
only in this City, but in every important city of this country you find 
persons from different provinces — in Calcutta you find people from 
Travancore ; in Travancore you find people from Bihar and Calcutta. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1009 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1009 

Very often, the residents of the different provinces, in spite of the 
restrictions imposed by customs and usage and sentiments of the 
orthodox, find ways of coming together, in nuptial contract. What 
shall be the effect on them and their progeny if we allow these 
various provincial laws to operate. Suppose a man from Bombay 
marries a girl from Bihar and in Bihar he marries another woman. 
In Bombay monogamy is the law. What will happen to his marriage 
in Bihar. While his children by that Bihar wife will be legitimate in 
Bihar, when they go to Bombay they shall be considered illegitimate 
and shall have no civil rights. What will happen to the hundreds 
of couples coming from different castes and different provinces ? 
What will be the rights of those children ? If you allow individuals 
to opt, many anomalies are likely to arise. A man may opt for the 
new Code ; his father may be governed by old Hindu law ; and the 
optee’s son may not opt for the new Code. What laws would govern 
such a family ? If, therefore, the suggestion of my hon. Friends were 
to be adopted, there will be such confusion, that the confusion in 
the tower of Babel as compared to this was nothing. It will take 
the Judges centuries to clear the confusion. Therefore, I feel that 
we have reached a stage when in the interests of Hindu society we 
cannot but have such a law. 

Previously in the provinces there was certain rigidity — people living 
in a certain province had one social tradition. People of the same 
caste had almost the same intellectual development, the same cultural 
code, etc. In those circumstances, when one married out of his caste 
one went to a different world altogether. But today these cultural, 
economic and intellectual disparities are disappearing. Society in 
India is becoming one. While previously there was some justification 
for marriage within one’s caste or inside the province, there is no 
such justification today, because the cultural level, the intellectual 
level and the economic level of the various communities are coming 
on a par with each other. According to eugenic principles marriage 
outside one’s caste under the previous state of affairs would have 
been bad. Today the laws of eugenics point in a different direction 
altogether. They point to a direction in which the hon. Mover of this 
bill is attempting to lead us. 

Dr. Mookerjee talked about the intensity and the depth and breadth 
of feeling in the country against this Code. I am a villager. I do not come 
from one of those advanced cities where the most modern theories are 
the order of the day. I know the minds of the villagers on this matter. 
I know that there is a lot of misapprehension in their minds about this 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1010 


1010 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Bill. That is because the opponents of this code have for the last five 
years or so been carrying on a tearing and raging propaganda against 
it while the supporters of the bill have been keeping mum and slient. 
In my area also people were by and large, opposed to the provisions of 
this Bill. But when I explained to them the provisions of this Bill in 
detail I can tell you that at least 70 per cent, of them became converts 
and they realized that nothing short of this was needed for the society. 
When Dr. Mookerjee says that there is intensity of feeling I concede that. 
But when he talks of the depth and breadth of that feeling I disagree. 
There is no depth in it because that feeling is based on ignorance. There 
is no breadth in it because the people, by and large, are not against 
this Code. It is only a handful of moneyed people who care more for 
their property, for their land, for their shares who are putting up such a 
row against this measure. I have had intimate talks with some of these 
orthodox people. They do not care a grain, an iota for the Hindu Law 
or the Hindu principles, or the rishis or the smritis. What rouses them 
into opposition is the property clause. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : That has been dropped now. 

Dr. Deshmukh (Madhya Pradesh): But wife also is property. 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : These are the three lines of my argument. 
There is nothing revolutionary in this. All that we are going to have 
is already there on the statute books. Secondly, this Bill does not go 
against the fundamental principles of Hindu religion. Rather, it tries 
to bring the circle full. The wheel has gone a full circle and Hindu law 
is being restored to its pristine purity. Thirdly, this law is essential for 
the existence of Hindu society in the circumstances of today. 

Since one of my friends from Bihar, Mr. Syamnandan Sahaya, when 
he spoke last referred to Dr. Jayakar, I would like to quote a very small 
paragraph. While writing his foreword to Hindu Law in Bharat published 
in 1951 — and the foreword was written in 1951 — what has Dr. Jayakar 
to say about this aspect — not about Hindu Law in general but about 
the aspect to which I referred ? He says : 

“The author has not omitted to note some of the prominent deficiencies 

which exist in present-day provisions of the Hindu Law, requiring early 

redress.” 

An Hon. Member : Who is the author ? 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : The author is another person, but the foreward is 
written by Dr. M. R. Jayakar — a scholar of Hindu Law, not the politician. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Also a politician. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1011 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1011 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : Probably my friend Mr. Syamnandan 
Sahaya referred to Dr. Jayakar, the politician. I am referring to 
Dr. Jayakar, the scholar. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Do you mean that politicians are 
not scholars ? 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : They are. And then Dr. Jayakar goes on 
to say in his foreword: 

“He observes that in modern times facilities of transit and 
interchange have enormously increased and various causes, appropriate 
to the times have compelled people of different races and religions to 
live together in territories governed by different systems of law. These 
new factors naturally tend to complicate problems of human life in the 
sphere of their legal relationships. Rules framed to regulate municipal 
and purely local set of circumstances prove inadequate or even out of 
place to deal with such problems arising out of the introduction and 
presence of foreign elements within the territory. The development 
of a Body of Rules to cover these new sets of circumstances is alreay 
overdue.” 

*Dr. Deshmukh : I am afraid probably my hon. Friends who 
welcomed my getting up to speak by saying “hear, hear” may be 
disappointed at what I am going to say today. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : Have you changed your mind ? 

Dr. Deshmukh : To a certain extent, probably, yes. 

An hon. Member : Wise men always do that. 

Dr. Deshmukh : I have been member of the Select Committee 
and I have appended a note of dissent to the Committee’s report. 
But that covers only four points. That note of dissent itself shows 
that appart from those four points, I am in general agreement 
with the many provisions proposed to the Bill. At the same time. 
I always felt that the time had not come when it was possible to 
revise, with some other and different ideals in front of us, the 
whole structure of the Hindu society and to change it radically. 
Ours is a vast country and the Hindu community is extremely 
large and numerous. We are also highly uneducated and absolutey, 
illiterate. From that point of view if you wish to change the basis 
of the Hindu society to any violent or great extent, the people 
who are not capable of understanding the changes are likely 
to suffer considerably. From that point of view I thought that 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 17th September 1951, pp. 2732-38. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1012 


1012 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the reforms so far as the Hindu Law is concerned should be as and 
when required and whenever a certain situation demands them, and only 
when the public opinion was ready and well-informed and was capable 
of following all the modifications in the social structure which we desire 
to bring in then alone we should attempt a thing of that nature. 

Therefore, I hold that the Hindu Law even when codified will not help 
us unless it is your desire to remodel the whole Hindu society for which 
the time, I submit, has not yet arrived. The Hindu law as laid down 
by the Smritis and as interpreted by the High Courts and the Privy 
Council is fairly well crystallised ; there may be certain differences of 
opinion ; there is a possibility of conflicts in interpretations but they are 
understandable and we have had this experience of these 150 years and 
this has not led to any great suffering or any great hardship.... 

Shri Lakshmanan (Travancore- Cochin) : On a point of order, are we 
at the general discussion or discussion on clause 2 ? 

Mr. Chairman : He is in order. 

Dr. Deshmukh : My remarks are really relevant so far as the discussion 
on this clause is concerned. What I was going to point out was that 
if we were going to remodel the society and change the whole law so 
as to suit modern times in an ideal manner that would be something 
far different from what we are attempting here. Even in what we are 
attempting at the present moment, I do not think that the Hindu Code 
represents a complete remodelling of the Hindu society. We are after 
all codifying what exists although with some changes. Because at the 
present moment and in this modern age, if we really want to follow 
modern ideas, I do not know whether the conception of any private 
property is going to survive very long. What is the use therefore of 
discussing the property law and debating whether it is according to 
the Mitakshra or the Dayabhaga or we are going to introduce the 
principle of primogeniture or something else. I personally feel that 
so long as we have the Hindu laws by which we are governed at the 
present time, and so long as it is a fairly well understood law, which 
the whole population and the whole Hindu community understands, the 
time has not come when we should attempt a radical and whole-sale 
alteration of the law which governs the society. Because, that is likely to 
create more trouble than we have at the present moment. At the same 
time, I have always advocated and I am in favour of removing those 
difficulties, those harrassments and those persecutions which exist and 
because of which, there is human sufferring. So far as these things are 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1013 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1013 

concerned, I think it should be the endeavour of every Member of 
Parliament to support the Bill; wherever it is found that our social 
structure is likely to suffer, and where it has led to a good deal of 
inconvenience and trouble, those reforms ought to be taken up and there 
should be no compromise with any orthodoxy. 

1.00 P.M. 

Shri Kamath : While we would like to hear the hon. Member, there 
was a half-hour discussion to be taken up at one o’clock .... 

Mr. Chairman : That has been postponed. 

Shri Kamath : We have had no notice. 

Mr. Chairman : It has been struck out here: 

Dr. Deshmukh : So far as removal of difficulties and hardships is 
concerned, I am prepared to go even farther than the sponsors of the 
Bill. The prohibition of polygamy and introduction and enforcement of 
monogamy are extremely desirable reforms. I also agree that it is time 
that the Hindu society provided for divorce under the law. There maybe 
some restrictions imposed ; but I do not think it is possible to shut our 
eyes to the instances and facts which come to our notice. It maybe a 
thing which my orthodox and sanatani friends may dislike. Of course, 
many of them dislike any change whatever. Unfortunately that is the 
position. Here, I must clear a misunderstanding. I have been regarded 
by some sanatani friends as a staunch opponent of the Bill on all points 
and in every respect. It is therefore that I have prefaced my remaks with 
the remarks that my hon. friend Pandit Mukut Bihari Lai Bhargava will 
probably not welcome what I was going to say today. The provisions 
should, however, be confined to these two aspects. 

Further, I would like some provision by which we can better the 
conditions of our widows. I have seen a great number of instances where 
they are undergoing inhuman suffering. So far as widows’ rights to 
property are concerned, we have had amending Bills. We have passed 
certain laws. But, to my knowledge, they have not benefited those for 
whom they were intended. I would like to persuade the hon. Members 
of the House that we should make some provision so far as they are 
concerned. 

Shri Bharati : We are not discussing that now. 

Dr. Deshmukh : I do not know if any announcement has been made 
in the House whether we are going to leave out of consideration those 
other sections and confine ourselves to only these things viz., marriage 
and divorce. Because I was not here, I do not know what decision has 
been taken. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1014 


1014 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Bharati : We are not likely to take them up. 

Mr. Chairman : Let the hon. Member go on. 

Dr. Deshmukh : If it is intended that we should confine ourselves 
only to the passing of a law that one person can at one time have only 
one wife, I would not very much object. But, as has been pointed out 
by my hon. Friend Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee, much ado is being 
made about a thing which is dying out by itself. The present struggle for 
existence and the economic forces at play are themselves bringing about 
the desired change. Therefore, although it is a necessary reform, I do 
not think it is something that some people may be prepared to die for. 

So far as divorce is concerned, I think there is much to be said 
in favour of divorce. At the earliest possible moment, this provision 
ought to be made. As has been pointed out by many Members, this is 
only a permissible reform, merely making provisions for divorces — the 
mere presence of the provision does not mean that every one will take 
advantage of it and get a divorce. What is the present position ? There 
are certain States — Baroda for instance, where divorce is allowed. And 
many who cannot agree between themselves or for other reasons who 
cannot get on, merely go and stay at Baroda for some time and obtain 
some sort of certificate that they are residents there and in this way 
get their purpose fulfilled. Wherever a married couple cannot get on 
together, may be for any reason, may be because one of them is suffering 
from a bad disease or there may be many other factors which cause a 
deterioration of their relationship they should be able to separate. It 
is human to expect under modern conditions that this freedom should 
be made available to them and it should be possible for an individual 
to get a divorce and separate. From that point of view, I submit that 
the provisions so far as divorce is concerned, are desirable. But on one 
point I vehemently disagree with Dr. Ambedkar and that is with regard 
to not recognising the customary divorce. He wants that all divorce 
cases must... 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : I want to get a point cleared. Does the hon. 
member advocate divorce of scramental marriages and also at the same 
time the continuance of sacramental marriages ? 

Dr. Deshmukh : I do not think there will be any difficulty. Even 
now a good many sacramental marriages get dissolved. That happens 
in various communities and under the Hindu law. And who is going 
to say that marriage under the so-called backward communities, which 
really are more advanced than others are not sacramental marriages ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1015 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1015 

They are and they are recognised by custom and their divorce systems 
are also recognised by customs and by the caste panchayats. But 
the Hon. Minister wants that all these cases must go through an 
involved method where lawyers will be necessary and all sorts of 
evidences will have to be taken and the whole thing will prove to 
be a hardship to these people. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Let there be customary marriage also. 

Dr. Deshmukh : If the provisions of the Bill are limited to the 
removal of the defects now present and we do not go further than 
that, then I would be prepared to support and I will not say that 
since you are not going to make it applicable to everybody in India 
therefore it should not be made applicable to Hindus also. I had raised 
that point as a major issue, because I felt that if it was intended 
that the whole of the Hindu society should be radically changed, then 
there was no reason why we should not make all the provisions of 
the measure applicable to all the people living in India. But since 
this is intended as a sort of a reform and the scope of it is confined 
specifically to certain sections. I have no quarrel so far as this point 
of view is concerned. 

Dr. Mookerjee undoubtedly went too far in asking that it should 
be left to the option of people. If that be the course that we adopt, 
then even the simplest possible reform demanded by society would 
be impossible. I do not know why he took that view though he has 
been very reasonable on most other points. This smacked a bit of 
a no-changer. He was prepared to support the divorce provisions if 
monogamy is made applicable to all the communities living in India. 
Although it looks plausible, it smacks more of obstructionist tactics 
than helping the passage of the Code. I for one stand even for radical 
reform which will not create confusion in the Hindu society. These 
provisions are not such as are likely to create confusion, because 
everybody need not resort to divorce or take advantage of the provision. 
There are inumerable cases where both man and wife suffer and desire 
that separation would be ideal. For such cases we make provisions by 
which separation would be allowed and I do not think it should be 
anybody’s business to come in their way merely on the ground that 
in the remote past we regarded marriage as a sacrament and not as 
a contract. As I have already said even sacramental marriages could 
be dissolved according to custom. After all recognition of sacramental 
marriage is recognition of customary marriage, because it is governed 
only by custom. There are many different forms of marriage. In some 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1016 


1016 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

cases there is saptapadi. I hope the modification which I have suggested 
will be acceptable regarding customary divorce. Originally it was the 
intention that all custom should be wiped out altogether. I am glad that 
Dr. Ambedkar has modified that stand but I am afraid he will have to 
modify it further. In one place where he had to explain his view point 
he said that custom must be such that it must be sensible, reasonable 
and satisfy certain other requirements. He expected custom to answer to 
standards of reasonableness. But what is reasonableness ? It can differ 
from man to man and from group to group. What may be regarded as 
reasonable by Dr. Ambedkar would be entirely unreasonable to Mr. 
Kamath or Pandit M. B. Bhargava 

Shri Kamath : Do you lump us together ? 

Dr. Deshmukh : Oh, No ! Not jointly but severally. From the point 
of view of custom I must say that the learned doctor, must be willing 
to go a little further, because every custom has had a history and it is 
not arguable on the basis of reason. Originally the view of the sponsors 
of the Code was that custom, whatever it was, was bad. That was why 
they provided that all “custom” was bad and no custom will be recognised 
under any circumstances. The whole society was to be governed by the 
provisions in black and white of the Code and no variation of any kind 
was to be recognised. Fortunately you have come to a stage when you 
are prepared to recognise custom. But to what extent is the question ? 
On the one hand you say that it should be reasonable but in many 
instances this is a contradiction in terms... 

Dr. Ambedkar : Why ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : It has to be reasonable before it 
is recognised. 

Dr. Deshmukh : In customary marriage one of the things essential 
and recognised as a necessary ingredient is that the bride and bridegroom 
must take seven steps round the fire. I do not see any reason or 
reasonableness behind it. What function does it perform ? How does it 
help so far as the wedlock is concerned ? 

Shri Kamath : It is symbolic. 

Dr. Deshmukh : Similarly 

Mr. Chairman : Is the hon. Member likely to continue his speech ? 

Dr. Deshmukh : Yes, Sir, I will take sometime longer. 

The House then adjourned till Half Past Eight of the clock on Tuesday, 
the 18th September, 1951. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1017 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1017 

*HINDU CODE — contd. . 

Clause 2 . — ( Application of Code) — Contd. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The house will now proceed with the further 
consideration of the Bill to amend and codify certain branches of the 
Hindu Law as reported by the Select Committee. 

Dr. Deshmukh (Madhya Pradesh): Sir, between the time I left 
my speech incomplete yesterday and now, two fine ladies who did 
not share... 

Shri Sondhi (Punjab): What is meant by “fine ladies” ? 

Dr. Deshmukh : Two cultured and.... 

Shri Sondhi : You may say modern ladies. 

Dr. Deshmukh : No, not so modern as we are accustomed to see. 
As I was saying, these ladies placed before me very strongly and 
sincerely their point of view. It was clear they viewed the Bill from a 
different angle. And while the Hon. Prime Minister is here I may also 
say that these ladies complained that their point of view has never 
received adequate consideration at the hands of the Prime Minister, 
and that there have been attempts made to come in the way of his 
being informed of the strength of their feelings and the view point 
that they wished to present before him. If this is a fact, and if it is 
not too late to do so, I would feel much obliged if these ladies could 
call upon the Prime Minister to place before him their point of view. 
They are entirely opposed to the Hindu Code Bill in any shape or form, 
including the provisions relating to divorce and monogamy. They say 
that it is an attack on Hinduism and on Hindu religion which will be 
not for the good of anyone. They also contend that essentially these 
are radical changes and these are sponsored by a few... 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : For my own enlightenment, 
I would like the hon. Member to say what he means by “they”. I could 
not hear the opening part of his sentence. 

An Hon. Member : Two fine ladies, he said. 

Shrimati Durgabai (Madras) : Will the hon. Member give us the 
names of these ladies for the benefit of hon. Members, because this 
may reflect on many ladies who are not of that opinion. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Two ladies do not cover the entire world. 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 18th September 1951, pp. 2742-50. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1018 


1018 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Deshmukh : They are as representative as my learned sister here 
claims to be in this House. And, Sir, it is also their contention that in 
their discussions they have been able to convert many persons who had 
agreed with my hon. sister here and who were of her inclination. They 
are opposed to divorce because they say.... 

The Prime Minister and Minister of External Affairs (Shri 
Jawaharlal Nehru) : Who are they ? 

Dr. Deshmukh : Sir, by this interruption I think the Hon. Prime 
Minister has admitted the statement that he has not seen them. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru : I do not know who they are. 

Dr. Deshmukh : There is a Women’s League in existence in India 

and.... 

Shrimati Durgabai : Yes, nobody denies that; but we want to know 
the names of these two ladies. 

The Deputy Minister of Food and Agriculture (Shri Thirumala 
Rao) : He is referring to persons who are outside the House and are not 
in a position to defend themselves. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There is no question of defence or offence. 

Dr. Deshmukh : I am glad Shrimati Durgabai admits the existence 
of a Women’s League 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There are opinions and opinions on the Code 
hon. Members are entitled to say that there is a certain opinion, that 
some ladies came to him and represented it to him. Further reference to 
the ladies is not necessary. It is for the House to accept or reject such 
an opinion of those people. In so far as a Member wants to mention the 
opinion which he is either going to support or controvert he can do so, 
instead of saying two ladies every now and then. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru : The difficulty is that he particularly referred 
to me and wants me to see unknown people of unknown whereabouts. 
How can I do that ? 

Dr. Deshmukh : They will not remain unknown and unseen as soon 
as they appear before the Prime Minister. 

Shri Karunakara Menon (Madras) : Are they above sixty or below 
sixty ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Evidently the Prime Minister has not given 
an interview to those ladies. If the hon. Member is not willing to give 
the names, he will communicate them. 

Shrimati Durgabai : Unless they want to remain anonymous. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1019 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1019 

Dr. Deshmukh : Not at all. The mere mention of there being 
ladies of a different viewpoint has excited our sisters here so much. 
( Interruptions ). They are also aware that a good many ladies, not alone 
the few ladies who came to see me, have resigned from the All India 
Women’s Conference. 

Several Hon. Members : Who are they ? ( Interruption ). 

Dr. Deshmukh : I can give not only their names but if I present 
them before you in all their strength you will probably be frightened. 
Their number is so large that it is impossible to give their names. 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh) : They are unknown women : they 
were canvassing in the Constitution House yesterday. 

Dr. Deshmukh : You have seen two of them yesterday. 

Shri Sidhva : They were unknown women. 

Dr. Deshmukh : Those are the very ladies I am referring to. . 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member will resume his seat. This 
is a very contentious matter. There is a large body of opinion in favour 
of it and there is also a body of opinion against it. It is no good talking 
of unknown women and unknown men. It does not add to the dignity 
of the proceedings of the House. The hon. Member need not refer again 
and again to these two women. There are not only two but two thousand 
against the code and there are also two million on the other side. So 
there is opinion both for and against. We are here discussing the bill 
dispassionately. Let nothing be said which, is derogatory to the high 
dignity of the House. Unknown women and unknown men are expressions 
which are not rather very parliamentary. The hon. Member need not 
pursue the matter by saying two ladies, again and again. 

Dr. Deshmukh : I had no desire to do so but for the interruptions. 
Sir, I will now come to the various amendments moved in the house. 
My friend Dr. Mookerjee suggested many alternatives to the acceptance 
of the Code. One of them was to make the provisions of the Code 
optional. There is also an amendment to say that there should be a 
referendum and if the majority of the people supported the Code in 
the referendum, then it should be made applicable. I had given notice 
of an amendment last time which referred to the Hindu Code as a 
whole and suggested that it be made applicable in any State after the 
Legislature of the State after the next elections had ratified it. There 
is a good deal of force in the suggestion regarding ratification by the 
State Governments and State Legislatures. After all we are not trying 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1020 


1020 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to go the way of Hitler and other dictators who forced social and 
other reforms on the people. We are a democratic nation and want 
to stick to democratic methods. If there is to be democracy and 
since this is only a personal law and not a law necessary for the 
maintenance of law and order or other purposes (it may be necessary 
in the view of some for the advancement of the community) there 
can be two opinions and one can be as honestly and steadfastly held 
as the other one. 

In the case of some of the reforms suggested the experience 
elsewhere in the world has not been altogether happy. Take for 
instance the divorce law. There are various degrees of divorces and 
varying facilities for obtaining the same current in the world. Those 
who advocated divorce and wanted to organise society on individual 
freedom have come to grief and looking at these consequences in 
foreign countries, when some of our people merely try to imitate 
others, because they think it is more fashionable to advocate that 
view, some people feel apprehensive that this is sheer mad and 
sheepish imitation. That spirit of sheer imitation is there and the 
support for it is also there, because these people have never had 
the patience to study the actual results which have come about 
in foreign countries. So the orthodox opinion which does not share 
the view of the reformists is equally honestly held and is as well 
founded. When we know that the Hindu religion, the Hindu law 
and the Hindu custom have survived the onslaughts of history for 
thousands of years, naturally we feel that this is the one country or 
nation or community which has something of its own and instead 
of there being a flat uniformity, the consequences of which have 
been evil in many cases, why not try and evolve a system just as it 
has been evolved all these thousands of years. I do claim that the 
Hindu religion and the Hindu law are the one religion and the one 
law which have been evolved through the centuries. They have not 
remained stagnant and I am sure Dr. Ambedkar will admit that the 
Hindu law and custom have never been static: they have adjusted 
themselves to the circumstances from time to time and are capable 
of doing so hereafter also. 

It is quoted that the Chinese and the Americans say that we are 
a backward people, because we have not got such and such a social 
system. Before we accept such comments bearing upon our society and 
before we incline ourselves to accepting their viewpoint, we must know 
what those people are. May I ask how far these Chinese and Americans 
have studied our religion and our law ? Have they imbibed the spirit 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1021 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1021 

of the Hindu religion before they condemn it or suggest any reform 
in our society ? That is a very pertinent question. Merely saying that 
a group of persons from foreign countries do not like it and suggest 
some modifications in our law or custom cannot be accepted. If we 
merely try to please a certain group of individuals without judging the 
background of the views they hold we would be meeting the fate of the 
donkey, the old man and his son, who tried to please every group of 
spectators they met on their way. In the beginning they were carrying 
the donkey and the old man and his son were walking. People laughed 
at them saying “Here is a man leading a donkey without either he or 
his son riding” so the old man got up on the donkey leaving the son 
to walk beside him. Still people laughed at them saying “Here is the 
old man riding the donkey leaving the poor little boy to walk along.” 
So the boy also 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Every body knows the donkey story. 

Shri Bharati (Madras): Who is the donkey here ? 

Dr. Deshmukh : I want to impress upon the people that they are 
donkeying 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Details of the donkey story need not be 
retailed here. 

Dr. Deshmukh : I would not have referred to this story but since 
this donkeying is going on time and again, very sensible people who 
ought to understand the value of the opinions of foreigners somehow 
or other try to persuade us and influence us by that mere fact. They 
say because certain foreigners say something there should be certain 
changes. I for one would not only not listen to such opinions but would 
not like anybody to give up his own viewpoint on this ground. 

So far as the basis of the Code is concerned it should be introduced 
only where we find that the circumstances demand it and not force 
things against the will of the people. It is certainly true that there is 
a very large body of educated women who are behind this Code. They 
are said to be very firmly of the opinion that the passing of the Code 
is necessary. If we analyse the amount of education there is especially 
among the women of India, we will realise that these women are hardly 
a drop in the ocean; the number of these women who are asking for a 
radical reform and changes in our law is extremely small. On the other 
hand, they are so impatient that they are not prepared even to listen to 
the other point of view of the ladies who have as much sense as they 
have except their English or Foreign education. When I was referring to 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1022 


1022 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“they”, I was referring to those millions of women living in our villages 
who have as good commonsense, and who know what they are and 
what they wish to be; it is they who are apprehensive of the changes 
that you are suggesting because even the introduction of divorce is 
going to change the attitude of everybody, of the society as a whole. 
The question I would like to ask is : Are you going to enter a wedlock 
with the idea of divorce, or are you going to enter wedlock with the 
idea of staying in it permanently ? If you adopt measures of easy 
divorce there is going to be a big change of attitude. Of course we are 
prepared to have that change and suffer the consequences, but the 
educated ladies who are sponsoring and advocating the passing of this 
Bill have not thought of all the consequences that are going to be fall 
especially to the lot of the illiterate women. After divorce an educated 
girl may be able to stand on her own legs, get a sufficiently lucrative 
job anywhere, and probably get a better husband. But what is going 
to happen to an illiterate woman ? My lady friends here still complain 
of the dominance of the male sex, and to the extent that the woman 
is tyrannised by men, what is going to happen to the illiterate woman 
who will be the object of these vagaries and domination of the male 
sex ? Have these educated women ever considered the consequences 
which will result from divorce for example, the care of children and 
their protection ? 

So, although I have expressed myself in favour of it, I would like 
to caution that in introducing any reform or changing any portions 
of our law we must coolly study the consequences that are going to 
result therefrom. Unless we do that we may be trying to do things 
which may not be necessary at all. I feel that there is much in the 
Hindu religion, there is much in the Hindu Law which deserves to 
remain, though probably in a slightly reformed condition. But the 
attitude behind some of the suggestions is somewhat anti-Hindu : 
they regard everything Hindu as suspect and look down upon it 
with contempt. They have somewhere or somehow imbibed the idea 
that whatever exists in India is absolutely rotten and that unless 
they go on the lines of foreign nations and imbibe their ideas and 
introduce them here, the Hindu society will not come up to the 
standards they expect of it. I am quite prepared to admit that they 
are actuated by honest motives, but at the same time there can 
be a different point of view which suggests that merely by blind 
imitation you are not going to survive. The way to survive is to modify 
according to the times and not go on in a whole-hogging fashion to 
change the very basis and fundamentals of our law and society. And 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1023 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1023 

from that point of view I suggest considerable caution. When I spoke 
yesterday, I thought the intention was to pass this Bill with only 
the marriage and divorce sections in it and that the rest of the bill 
was not likely to come up. But now I find that is not the attitude 
of those who are in favour of the Bill; they do not wish to omit the 
other portions. They are prepared to confine the enactment to the two 
chapters only from the point of view of availability of time but they 
do not wish to give up the rest of the Bill. If that is the idea, then I 
am afraid many of the Members of this House will probably change 
their attitude because it does not mean it is a compromise which will 
last as after getting these two chapters passed they will probably 
insist upon the property clauses and the other sections of the Code. 
If we look to the history of the codification, we will find that there is 
a great and important body of public opinion against the Bill. Most 
of the bar associations have not only been against modification but 
they have been against codification also. The Committee that was 
appointed for the purpose found, when it went round the country, 
innumerable associations and innumerable individuals who expressed 
their strong condemnation of the proposals that were going to be 
made. Under these circumstances, I feel that it is not proper that 
we should say that after passing these two chapters we will take up 
the rest of the Bill also and that we will not give it up. It should 
be definitely understood that so far as this Parliament is concerned, 
we should confine to the marriage laws provided in this bill. The 
question of whether there is any possibility of the property clauses 
being taken up will, I think, determine the attitude of support or 
opposition of certain Members of the House. If it is the idea that the 
entire Code should be taken up, then it would be very wise to leave 
this to ratification by the State Legislatures. Then we will be giving 
them sufficient time to educate public opinion so that if the Code 
is really wanted, if there is any important body of public opinion 
in favour of the various detailed changes sought to be made in the 
Hindu Law, then the concerned State can accept it. And there is no 
harm in one State accepting it and another not accepting because 
this is a matter of personal law and it should be completely open 
to any individual or group of individuals to choose the sort of law 
that they want. 

While I support the provisions with regard to monogamy and divorce 
and say that they may be passed, although I would like to suggest 
certain modifications, and one I have already moved yesterday, namely 
that the customary divorce should be allowed to continue — and I am glad 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1024 

1024 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to find it is likely to be accepted, I suggest that the present proposals 
should be confined only to the marriage and divorce laws and 
nothing else should be enacted by this Parliament for the present. 

*Shrimati Jayashri (Bombay) : I beg to support the amendment 
moved by the Hon. Law Minister to clause 2.1 am glad that sub- 
clause (4) of clause 2 is sought to be dropped. That sub-clause says : 

“Notwithstanding anything contained in the Special Marriage Act, 

1872 (III of 1872), this Code shall apply to all the Hindus whose 

marriages have been solemnized under the provisions of that Act 

prior to the commencement of this Code.” 

10-00 A.M. 

I am glad that this sub-clause has been dropped, because under 
the Special Marriage Act the rights that people enjoyed were much 
broader. This applies to the Indian Succession Act also. Although 
under the Hindu Code we are trying to bring about reform, yet this 
Code does not confer the same rights which are available under 
the Special Marriage Act.. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Under the Special Marriage Act, they 
cannot adopt. Under this Code, they can. Is that not an advance ? 

Shrimati Jayashri : I am saying that the inheritance rights 
there are broader than under the Hindu Code. So, I am glad that 
he has dropped this sub-clause from the Bill. 

With regard to the argument as to why we should not make 
this an ideal and universal Code which can be applied to Muslims, 
Parsis and Christians, I would like to say that we must first find 
out whether Members are prepared to go so far. It would be an 
ideal Code if we could reach to the stage of the Indian Succession 
Act and the Civil Marriage Act, but it is clear that our society is 
not at present prepared even to accept the reforms under the Hindu 
Code and go thus far. So, I wonder whether Members will accept 
the broader principles which underlie the Special Marriage Act. 

Yesterday, Dr. Mookerjee said that the Muslims also should be 
asked to accept the monogamy principle. I would like to say that 
the Muslim Law gives much more rights to women. Under our 
existing Hindu Law, women are not given those rights. 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 18th September 1951, pp 2750-54. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1025 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1025 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : He was on the question of monogamy. 

Shrimati Jayshri : Monogamy and sacramental marriage. In 
regard to our sacramental marriage, this is what the married couple 
pledge themselves to do : 

“Having taken these seven steps with me, we have become companions. 
May I retain that companionship and never part from thee nor thou 
from me. Let us be united. Let us always take counsel together, loving 
each other and ever ready in each other’s company, let us be united 
in mind and grow together in strength and prosperty. Let us join in 
our aspirations, our vows and our sorrows.” 

May I ask whether this ideal of sacramental marriage is kept in 
our present society ? I would request Dr. Mookerjee to give his honest 
opinion whether he really thinks that no reform is necessary in our 
present Hindu Marriage Law. We all know that our Hindu society 
allows a man to marry as many times as he likes. This vow which 
we take during the marriage ceremony is only meant for women. Our 
laws are one-sided. They are only meant for women. We all know 
that when a man becomes a widower, even at the burning ground 
when he goes there to attend his wife’s funeral his engagement takes 
place. So, a man considers marriage in such a light manner. And 
still, we talk of our Hindu marriages being sacramental. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Widows also can marry. 

Shrimati Jayashri : Women are more conservative in that way. 
They still consider that they would not like to marry even if they 
become widows. They do not seek to have second mrriages, but due to 
the one-sidedness of our Hindu Law Nariprathishta has gone down. 

Hon. Members must have read K. Mushruwala’s article in the 
Harijan where he shows how we are treating women in our society 
at present. We all know how in the Mahabharat the clothes of 
Draupadi were removed and she prayed to Krishna: 

^niqV’ 

(“I am sinking in the sea of Kauravas. Save me O Krishna.”) 

Similar cries we hear today from our poor women who are ill- 
treated by our society. We call our Hindu society Sanatana, that is 
to say, Sada Nutan (always new) — it is always changing. Change is 
the essence of life. If society does not change, it becomes stagnant. 
For thousands of years our society has survived because it has 
accepted changes. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1026 


1026 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The idea has been pressed that we should not have divorce ; that our 
marriages are sacramental, as Dr. Deshmukh said just now, from olden 
days we read in our Smritis ( Parasara and Narad) that under certain 
conditions divorce was accepted. In the Hindu Code today we have tried 
to maintain the sanctity of marriage and the welfare of the parties. The 
framers have provided prior remedies for avoiding the extreme step of 
seeking divorce and those are restitution of conjugal rights and judicial 
separation. Therefore, divorce is not very easy. In Baroda the Divorce 
Act was passed in 1937, and in the analysis taken in the year 1939 
the cases of divorce and judicial separation were 42 in number. Out 
of these, eleven were due to cruetly ; two due to desertion and cruelty, 
seven due to desertion by husband ; one due to desertion by wife ; six 
due to cruelty and habitual drunkenness of husband and marrying a 
second time. These cases show that divorces are not very easy. Only 
under special conditions divorces are granted. 

Also we know that divorces are prevalent in the lower classes. Only 
in the upper classes this Code seeks to introduce this change. Yesterday, 
Dr. Mookerjee raised the cry of ‘religion in danger’. I would ask him 
whether beating of one’s wife is considered to be religious. A woman 
filed a suit in one of the courts in Madras for assault by her husband. 
And the learned judge gave a judgement that beating the wife is allowed 
in Hindu Law. So, may I ask him whether such cruel customs can be 
called religious ? Religion is always personal contact with God. 

Bef'brTPTf Pd^fd” 

[O Arjun ! God lives in the hearts of all living beings.] 

It is not by passing particular laws that religion can be in danger. As 
I said Hindu religion is a vast ocean where changes take place now and 
again and we have accepted these changes. That is why our structure 
of Hindu religion has lasted for such a long time. May I also draw your 
attention to the necessity of changes in Hindu structure. I would say 
that at present our law is one-sided. We do not give any relief to our 
women. We have our National Planning commission which wants to plan 
on the present structure. I would say that unless the social structure is 
changed, it is no use planning on that body which is rotten. I would in 
this connection like to make some suggessions for improvement in our 
society. In a planned society woman’s place shall be equal to that of 
man: equal status, equal opportunities and equal responsibilities shall 
be the guiding principle to regulate the status of woman, whatever the 
basis of society in the plan. Woman shall not be excluded from any 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1027 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1027 

sphere of work, merely on the ground of her sex. Marriage shall 
not be a condition precedent to the enjoyment of full and equal 
civic status and social and economic rights by woman. 

May I ask whether at present the status of woman is such, so 
that we can plan properly in the present society. Family life and 
organisation and woman’s enjoyment of a share in the property are 
very necessary. Marriage and succession laws governing these are 
also necessary and that is why I feel that unless some change is 
made in our present Hindu Law, I do not think it would be possible 
to build on the structure that we find at present. 

The Women’s Conferences have always asked for a common Code. 
We are also in favour of a common Code. We are not asking that 
special privileges should be given to only Hindu women. We all 
know that at present our women are suffering and are backward. 
Parsi, Christian and Muslim women are far ahead of Hindu Women 
in this respect and that is why at present we are supporting this 
Hindu Code. As I said earlier, if we make this Hindu Code an 
ideal one, the other communities also will have no objection in 
accepting our Code. 

Dr. Deshmukh said that many women have resigned from the 
All-India Women’s Conference on this question. On the contrary I 
would say that in our Conference we have from the very beginning, 
asking for these changes and it was due to our request that so 
many pieces of legislation on marriage, right of women to property, 
etc., were introduced. In Bombay when Dr. Deshmukh of Bombay 
wanted to bring the bill on giving property rights to widows, we 
requested him not to hurry with this measure, but to wait so that 
it may include properties for daughters as well as adoption and 
other clauses. At that time he told us that he would like to hurry 
with the measure and that he would bring other reforms also. 
Therefore, these reforms are due for a long time and it cannot be 
said that we have not taken public opinion. Even this Hindu Code, 
as you know, is before the public for the last ten years and it is 
no use saying that public opinion has not been sounded. I think 
enough public opinion has been created and it is very wrong to say 
that very few women are supporting this measure. We have had 
many public meetings in various places and women from all over 
India are supporting this measure. On behalf of women I give my 
whole-hearted support to this Hindu Code. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1028 

1028 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

* The Minister of Works, Production and Supply (Shri 
Gadgil) : I heard the speech of my hon. friend Dr. Syama Prasad 
Mookerjee with great attention. I should say that it was not entirely 
unhelpful. He said two things which appealed to me. One was that 
in the matter of social reform we should carry public opinion to 
the largest possible extent. Secondly he said that this was not a 
matter of politics, this was a matter in which every citizen of this 
country was interested irrespective of his or her political views. 
Because of these two things, I am somewhat optimistic and I am 
certain that if we are able to create in this House an atmosphere 
of give and take and of compromise we will be able to put on the 
statute book something about which individually and collectively 
we may be proud of. 

Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee praised the Hindu culture and 
called it dynamic. I share that view. It is because Hindu culture 
has the genius of adaptation to circumstances, it is because that 
it is responsive to new trends that it has survived and it has 
been the pride and glory of us all. Today there is a greater need 
for the leaders of thought to consider how we shall attempt to 
progress further and how we shall bring the law in line with public 
morality. The old ways may not be effective in the modern times and 
therefore it behoves us that we must also have to resort to modern 
methods. There is no dispute about the fact that there are certain 
evils; although I am a good Hindu and I will yield to none in my 
admiration for Hindu culture, still I am not blind to the faults which 
have crept in our life as a community. By adopting a Constitution 
with the objective of equality of status and social justice, we have 
taken a great responsibility. We want to inaugurate a society in 
which there will be perfect equality. If that is the objective, then 
surely that cannot be achieed by following old methods of shouting 
old slogans. We have established political equality by adopting 
the system of adult franchise. We want to secure social justice 
and remove as far a possible economic inequalities by erecting 
certain economic institutions which will secure a better standard 
of life for those who are down-trodden, by securing opportunities 
for the expansion of the personality of every citizen. And that is 
only possible in my humble view, by nationalising at least the 
means of production and securing an adequate standard of wages, 
controlling profits, and if at all private effort is to be given any place 
in the economic system by laying down that it shall be under the 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 18th September 1951, pp. 2754-68. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1029 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1029 

regulation and control of the State. In other words, by legislation 
we are trying to secure social justice and trying to remove economic 
inequality. If by legislation we have secured political equality, if by 
legislation we are attempting to secure economic equality or at least 
to remove economic inequalities, it is only logical that by the same 
process, namely by legislation, we must try to secure social equality. 

My friend Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee stated that by codifying the 
Hindu Law you are shutting out altogether those sources of Hindu 
Law which have been functioning from ages and which has secured 
the means of progress so far. I agree that the sources of Hindu Law 
are smritis, shrutis, sadachara, and one’s own conscience. All that 
is true. But all that was good and valid enough when the political 
constitution or the political set-up of the country was different from 
what it is now. Even in the West it was considered that a change 
in the law could be effected either by legislation or by legal fiction 
which meant that the law apparently remained the same but in 
practice it underwent a change and by custom. Even in the West 
the modern tendency is to depend mostly or substantially upon 
legislation in effecting the necessary changes which will make the 
law to be in conformity with public morality. Law always follows 
public morality. Public opinion goes ahead and progresses because 
that is the life in the community, not being static or stagnant, 
continually progresses, continually proceeds, because the law of life. 
Therefore the legislation comes behind. But there should not be such 
a big hiatus between the two so as to endanger the happiness of 
the community. It is therefore the duty of every thoughtful citizen, 
of every person who has the interest of the community at heart to 
see that the time-lag between the two is as short as possible. 

Now, it is no good depending always upon the second method, 
namely of legal fiction, and allowing the judiciary to strain the 
meaning of plain words and asking them to try to bring the law in 
conformity with the prevailing opinion in the community. 

The third method, namely that of custom, is, I should say, 
a misfit in modern circumstances. After all, custom was good 
when the legal power of the State was not adequate, was not 
sufficiently developed in order to enforce what was thought 
to be just and proper and what was thought to be in the best 
interests of the community. Now, in the modern world to talk 
of custom prevailing over law is a sort of anomaly. If the 
custom is prevalent on such an extensive scale I have not the 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1030 


1030 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

slightest doubt that legislators will initiate the legislation and the 
custom will be incorporated and dignified into a rule of law. 

That being so I am unable to understand the argument of my hon. 
friend Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee that we are doing something 
revolurionary and in such a manner that the normal sources of law 
which were available will be completely closed. It is not so. Whatever 
we have inherited we have so to say, instead of putting our inheritance 
into a number of banks consolidated the inheritance and put it in 
some bank which has the prestige and strenth of a Reserve Bank, 
namely legislation. That is what we have done. In fact in the present 
Code as it is now before this House what is really done is that we are 
practically coordinating what is in existence — the present law — to the 
extent of eighty per cent. There is no doubt an element of progress 
to some extent. I will even concede that there is an element which 
to some extent goes in advance of public opinion. But I want to ask 
one question to the Members of this House. Is it or is it not our duty 
not merely to think in terms of the needs of the persent moment but 
to think in advance of our society, as we visualise or as we desire 
that it ought to be ? If planning is good in the economic sphere why 
should it be bad in the social sphere ? We are anxious that our society 
should be such. If that is the ideal on which we are agreed and on the 
assumption that we are . agreed — because we have adopted it as one 
of the objectives in our Constitution — then we have to consider how we 
shall manage to take our society to that destination. Can we follow a 
policy of laissez-faire in this sphere or shall we think ahead, think in 
advance just have our target and gradually, through the mechanism of 
law, which in due course, become part and parcel of the community’s 
life and arrive at the destination according to the schedule ? 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari (Assam) : That is questionable. 

Shri Gadgil : If we leave it to non-official effort I have no doubt 
that in course of time, may be two generations hence, things will 
become as we desire now. But by that time public opinion would have 
advanced much more. In other words we will never be able to cut the 
time element between the growing public opinion and the legislation. 
I therefore say that if there is any element of advance thinking in 
this Code it is justifiable, and I would say that it is an act of wisdom. 

Now the opposition to this Bill has been from several points of view. 
There are people who do not like any interference by the Legislature in 
these matters. There are people who think that the Parliament, or the 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1031 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1031 

Legislature of the country, has a right to interfere but not the present 
Parliament. They rather prefer that the matter should be completely 
looked after and dealt with by those who will come after this Parliament 
is dissolved. So far as the first school is concerned I think, as was 
said rightly by Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee, it is too late in the 
day. Continually, in the course of the last 150 years, legislation after 
legislation has been passed by the Central Legislature — whatever 
the denomination of that legislature may have been — and all those 
things have become part and parcel of the Hindu community and its 
life. When I said that soon after the passing of this code, same thing 
would happen, my hon. friend Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee was not 
agreeable. He has accused us, namely the Members of the Treasury 
Bench of suffering from “Secularities”. I should say, knowing as I 
do, his views of social reform, knowing as I do that he comes from 
Bengal, a province where social reform was first mooted, beginning 
with Raja Ram Mohan Roy and carried on by Kesav Chandra Sen, 
Tagore and other people of great importance and consequence, that I 
cannot believe that he is seriously opposed to what is being proposed 
in the Hindu Code, but probably he is suffering from ‘electionitis’ 
and if that is so, the cure and remedy will be provided for in the 
general election. He agreed that it is very difficult to say on which 
side is the public opinion. I think he is right. We might claim public 
opinion to be 

Pandit Malaviya (Uttar Pradesh) : Will the Government be prepared 
to make this Hindu Code one of the issues in the election ? 

Shri Gadgil : In spite of the Government, it has already become. 
The point is that it is difficult to say on which side the public opinion 
is. I want to ask in all humility one question to the hon. Members 
of this House, Has or has not the Government which still carried 
the confidence of this House some right to initiate social reform, not 
merely the right, but a duty enjoyed on this Government in terms of 
the clauses of the Constitution ? You have given us certain directives ; 
you have laid down the objectives. If we do not do anything on those 
lines, the electorate might turn round and say : Well you passed this 
constitution merely to fool us. Half the population in this country, 
namely, the women will say : You talk of social equality but where is 
that social equality. {An hon. Member. Question). I am sure the hon. 
Member will lose in his own house if he takes a referendum. 

Pandit Maitra (West Bengal) : Does the hon. Member say half a 
dozen women of half the population ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1032 


1032 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Gadgil : I take a better view of my sisters than my hon. friend 
is prepared to concede. However, as my hon. friend said, the thing will 
be evident a few months hence. The point is that the legislature has 
pressed a number of statutes affecting Hindu life, Hindu marriage, 
divorce, in fact every aspect of the law. Therefore, we cannot say now 
that this Parliament has no right. The question whether this Parliament 
has a right or not. I have already answered. So far this Parliament 
has been considered to be competent enough to make a constitution for 
this country and it passes my comprehension to accept a proposition 
that this Parliament is incompetent to pass an ordinary law. 

Pandit Maitra : The House was elected for giving a constitution. 

Shri Gadgil : This very House passed the Constitution in which 
they passed the Chapter relating to transitory provisions. I do not 
think that my hon. friend Pandit Maitra objected then and said that 
this Parliament should have no right to govern from now till the new 
House comes into existence after the general elections. 

Pandit Maitra : That is nobody’s case. 

Shri Gadgil : I am glad. What is after all that is attempted to 
be done ? As I said 80 per cent, is merely a collection of the existing 
statutes either passed by the Central Legislature or passed by the 
State Legislature. Dr. Syama Prasad was very eloquent over Dharmic 
marriage. I do not think that the Code prevents it. There is free 
scope from the Dhushyanta Shakuntala type of marriage to Prithviraj 
Samyugita type of marriage, namely from Gandharva to the Rakshasa 
type and all the eight forms can be practised by any Member of this 
House or by the public outside. This Code does not prevent love-making, 
it does not prevent eloping with bride’s consent even against the consent 
of the parents. So far as eight forms of Hindu sacramental marriage are 
concerned, they are not affected in the least. What is the grievance ? 
Is it because the word ‘sacramental’ has been changed into Dharmic ? 
It was changed because all of us wished it; it conveys no meaning and 
therefore we said : let us take the word Dharmic which will fit in and 
convey some meaning, and that is why ‘ Dharmic ’ was used. 

An Hon. Member : It is a misnomer. 

Shri Gadgil : My hon. friend Dr. Syama Prasad was very eloquent 
over the conception of Hindu ‘marriage’. Those noble sentiments I 
personally share. Marriage is something more than mere union of 
bodies, it is a co-partnership ; it is joint endeavour for spiritual uplift; 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1033 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1033 

it is so to say a custodian of confidences and feelings which cannot 
be expressed in any language of the world. It is a noble conception : I 
do share that but at the same time it does happen that sometime an 
ideal is perverted. We find that in a progressive society things happen 
which have got to be taken notice of by those who are leaders of society 
and who are leaders of thought. I today, particularly on account of our 
contact with the West, we have somehow or other to go down in certain 
respects, it does not mean that our culture is less ; it only means a 
challenge to us to reform. We have got the genius to adopt, we had 
to act, and therefore, those legislations to which reference was made 
by my hon. friend, Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee were quite justified. 

What is this prevention of a marriage between a person belonging, 
to one community and a woman belonging to another ? Does it sound 
very well in our modern days, in the year 1951 ? Does it sound very 
well that a man because he is born in a particular community that he 
must remain outside the boundaries of the village perpetually ? Does 
it sound very well that because a man belonging to a downtrodden 
caste today by his merit has assumed a position of great inportance 
and is learned today, he must not be given the same social status, the 
same social welcome, the same social reception as we give to a person 
belonging to another caste ? Is the Varna to be determined irrespective 
of guna or it has to be determined in the context of guna or in other 
words “accomplishment” ? That is a challenge to your sense of equality. 
If today the old ban against Pratiloma marriage is completely broken, 
you should welcome it. That is exactly what is being attempted. Why 
should there be such differences ? If marriage is a matter of free choice, 
why should there be legal impediments in it ? Why should a person 
belonging to one section or one community not marry a woman belonging 
to another ? All these artificial man-made impediments must go. I do 
not remember any case in which the son of a Brahmin was born with 
a copy of Vedas or a Kshatrya born with a sword or a Harijan born 
with a broom. At birth they are all alike and at death they are all 
alike. In between the two, it is the duty of the society and the State 
to see that the same atmosphere of equality shall prevail. Anybody 
who argues against this, argues against humanity, argues against the 
very principle which goes to make a man, argues against self-respect. 
What is being done here ? Nothing contrary to our old traditions is 
being attempted. On the contrary, my accusation against my friend 
and colleague Dr. Ambedkar is that as he is growing old and old, he is 
growing less and less enthusiastic about social reform. Ten years ago, 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1034 


1034 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I think his language would have been more vitriolic ; today he is 
the very soul of moderation. He said the other day, “Anyhow, with 
something changed here, something cut off there, and something added 
or substracted, let me see the Hindu Code through because it will be 
considered at least one honest attempt by the present generation to 
put matters right”. He is so anxious. He is in a mood to be prepared to 
give and take. I would therefore urge on the Members who are keen on 
opposing to see whether that is not a situation which we should avail 
of. I warn you that the next Parliament which will be elected on adult 
franchise is bound to be more radical in the matter of marriage and 
divorce 

Some Hon. Members : Leave it to the next Parliament. 

Shri Gadgil : although it may not be so radical to begin with 

in the matter of property. As regards, marriage, as regards divorce, I 
have not the slightest doubt, at least to the extent I know the mind and 
general outlook of those who inhabit my part of the country, Maharashtra. 

Shri Bhatt (Bombay) : Leave it to the next Parliament. 

Shri Gadgil : We would have welcomed it. I would have agreed to 
that if there had been no duty cast upon us to see that whatever ideals 
and objectives are embodied in the Constitution should be given effect 
to as far as possible. It is because of this duty. I have agreed to support 
this code. 

Shri Bhatt : The skies are not failing today. 

Shri Gadgil : Will the heavens fall if it is passed ? The sky is above 
and we are below. See what things are happening down here. 

Shri R. C. Upadhyaya (Rajasthan) : That is why it does not rain. 

Shri Gadgil : Now Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee asked. “Why 
monogamy only for the Hindus ?”. I ask one question. If monogamy is a 
good ideal, does it become bad because somebody else does not follow ? 
We talk of Ram Rajya. If there is anything in the life and career of the 
Great Rama, it is his Eka Pathni Vrath. I want to test your sincerity. 
Are you for Ram Rajya ? Then, give support for this part at least. It is 
no good talking about Ram Rajya when it suits you for election purposes 
and when it does not suit you.... 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : What about Dasaratha Rajya ? What did 
Dasaratha who was the father of Rama do ? 

Shri Gadgil : That is only an improvement by a new generation 
over the old. Because he knew the troubles of having three mothers, 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1035 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1035 

he decided that his sons should have only one. That only shows how 
things progress. 

An hon. Member : Was there divorce ? 

Shri Gadgil : There was that custom. 

d u 'drfl I 

[When the husband is lost, dies, goes to another land, becomes impotent 
or morally degenerate, another one is allowed.] 

This proves it. 

Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee’s argument was that if it is good, let 
it be made applicable also to the Muslim community. I have no doubt 
that the Government either this or the Government that will come in . 
power after the General Elections will not shirk to bring in a measure 
of that kind in which this particular law will be applicable to every one 
irrespective of religion. 

Some hon. Members : Why not now ? 

Shri Gadgil : As a matter of fact, I know that in Bombay, when 
the bill for Monogamy was under discussion, the same line of criticism 
which was adopted by Dr. Mookerjee yesterday, was taken by many 
a Member in the Bombay Legislative Assembly. I remember that the 
Government of Bombay stated through their Minister that a Bill of that 
character would be welcome. Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee somehow 
or other thinks that this Government is nervous and may not bring 
some thing which may offend the Muslim community. I ask him just to 
consider if 90 per cent, of the people in this country, who are Hindus, 
agree to this measure, will it or will it not strengthen the hands of the 
Government to pass a legislation for the remaining ten per cent ? By 
accepting this, you will strengthen the hands of Government. I might 
here mention one instance which I am sure you will recall: not you 
particularly. In 1930, when the first Child Marriage Restraint Bill was 
under consideration, to which subsequent amendments were moved by 
my hon. friend Mr. B. Das in 1936, when the original Bill was under 
discussion in this very Hall. Mr. Jinnah supported it, although the rest 
of the Mohammedan leaders who were Members here opposed it, on the 
ground that it was interference with the personal law of the Muslim 
community. His words are, if there is a conflict between religion and 
public morality, the latter shall prevail, Mullahas or no Mullahas. 
You can find this out from the reports of the Legislative Assembly 
proceedings that this was his stand. If we are convinced that to have 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1036 


1036 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

more than one wife is again public morality, I think, we must agree to 
monogamy. Monogamy in the first attempt at rationing in the social 
sphere so far. It is necessary in the highest interests of the community, 
in the highest interests of individual happiness that there must be 
monogamy and I have not the slightest doubt that the progressive 
elements in the Muslim community will accept it immediately. If the 
non-progressive does not accept it, it will equally be the duty of the 
Government to enforce it. I have no doubt about that, and if I ever 
am in that government, be assured that I will do my best to enforce 
it. That is so far as my personal attitude is concerned. My point is, 
if that is Amrit, because it is not taken by somebody else, does it 
become poison ? I think this is an insult to the intellectual greatness 
of this House to argue on these lines. 

Coming to the question of divorce, nobody argues that every married 
couple should go for a divorce. At the same time, if it is the duty of 
the State to see that there is less of social tension, and efforts are 
made to create an atmosphere in which every individual will have 
the right to have maximum satisfaction and happiness, then, it is the 
duty of the State to create conditions for having judicial institutions 
or legal institutions of that character. Eighty percent, or more in this 
country have something like customary divorce. They are not worried. 
But, in the five per cent, or ten per cent, or whatever the percentage 
may be, on account of marriage conditions or on account of several 
other factors, — probably the modern woman is more intellectual — if 
she for one reason or another finds that it is not possible to live 
with a man whom she has married, then, marriage should not be 
a life sentence. It should not be that there will be no happiness 
unless one of them dies. No doubt, such cases may be few but the 
exceptions are there. Therefore, there must be some provision made 
for the same. You may make it strict; you may not make it as cheap 
as in the West, but speaking for myself, this is the most orthodox 
and reactionary law that you are laying down. Left to myself. I 
would have said that incompatibility of temper was enough ground 
to dissolve the marriage. After all, what is the assumption under the 
provisions for divorce ? It is that the parties cannot be happy. Should 
they go through this tortuous process of adultery or alleged adultery 
or cruelty or desertion ? What is the idea ? Should they always go to 
a hotel and have evidence of hotel bills, etc.? I think it must be a 
straight and honest and genuine affair that those who cannot agree, 
let them part. That will secure maximum happiness. People think 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1037 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1037 

that this will end society. But if this custom is available in 90 per cent, 
of the population and in spite of that society has continued to progress 
all these generations, I do not think the extension of it merely to the 
remaining five or ten per cent, is going to change the integrity of society. 
On the other hand, the consequences that will follow will all be for the 
good. In fact restricting marriages and all the old injuctions that you 
must not marry in the same gotra have good reasons behind them. These 
restrictions were due to considerations of eugenics. If that is the case with 
those injunctions, then these will have greater application if the boy or 
girl marries outside the caste. Then there will be greater virility in the 
race, better type of persons will come into existence. This is a matter 
which must be considered in an atmosphere of scientific understanding. 
This is not the time nor the occasion to dilate on this aspect of the 
question. I will only add that behind these injunctions against marriage 
between sapindas or sagotras there were eugenic considerations. They 
must be reassessed. 

Shri A. C. Shukla (Madhya Pradesh) : An old man marrying a young 
woman, is it according to eugenics or not ? 

Shri Gadgil : You should certainly stop an old man marrying a young 
girl. 

Shri A. C. Shukla : What will be the position of the child born to 
an old man and a young woman ? 

Shri Gadgil : It will be as healthy as possible. 

The point is, all those laws or customs which definitely have affected 
the progressive character of Hindu society ought to go. Dr. S. P. Mookerjee 
made a reference to Brahmo Samaj, Sadhanan Samaj. From Raja Ram 
Mohan Roy, to Ranade, Tilak, Agarker there is a galaxy of social reformers 
of whom we are all proud. But why should the process stop there ? 
If what was done in the past was good we ought to follow? the same 
principles of progress. And if we follow that same line of advancement, 
why should you be afraid now ? Why should you think that because Manu 
was great, therefore there cannot be any man as great as Manu in the 
centuries that may roll after his death ? I think Mr. Ahmad is as great 
or as good as Yagnavalkya, only without a jenuva. Otherwise he is as 
good an interpreter. And Dr. Ambedkar is as great as Manu or Gargya. 

An hon. Member : He is Manu. 

Shri Gadgil : And I am as good as any other old citizen. And why 
should we feel that the present generation cannot undertake the task of 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1038 


1038 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

social reconstructions ? India could not be an integrated unit under one 
flag during ten or eleven centuries. But if that task was achieved by this 
generation, is not this generation competent to do something in the social 
sphere to make society progressive ? I want an answer to that question. 
You praise us and praise yourselves for having done something great in 
the political sphere. Why are you afraid of achieving something in the 
social field ? Why do you have this inferiority complex ? Of course what 
was done by Manu was good. But — 

“ dldHI ct^qfMrd ^cfl'UII 
8TTT cbl^bEII: Rld^d ” 

Because this well was dug by my great-great grand-father, and although 
the water of it is saltish, I must drink it. Well, that is not my outlook. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : Then why not throw away your sacred thread ? 

Shri Gadgil: I have thrown it away. Look here. 

Pandit Malaviya : I believe the Hon. Minister puts it on now and 
then whenever he feels like it ! 

Shri Gadgil: No, nothing of the kind. And since it is a matter 
concerning me, you will kindly permit me to dilate on it for a moment. 

Shri Brajeshwar Prasad (Bihar) : Sir, on a point of order. Is it 
parliamentary for the Hon. Minister to show the House his tummy ? 

Shri Gadgil: Well, it was appreciated anyway. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am glad this point was raised. I can only 
say that it is not proper for questions to be put whether a person is 
wearing this or that, leading to unnecessary complications. 

Shri Bhatt: I want to know one thing. Can he have Yagnopavita at 
the time of Yagna ? 

Shri Gadgil: I am prepared to satisfy the curiosity of the hon. Member. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Hon. Minister need not discard his 
Yagnopavita to support the Bill. He can have it and still support it. 

Shri Gadgil : Some years ago when I was in Thana Jail and when 
I started thinking about Hindu religion, I thought I was not a good 
Brahmin and could not be one merely because I had a Jeneu and I 
discarded it. And only when I am a good Brahmin, even for a moment, I 
will put it on, and this I did when I attended the Somnath installations 
ceremony. Then I felt a moment of inspiration. I felt my whole being 
ennobled when I was there and I put it on for sometime. Later on I threw 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1039 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1039 

it away because I came from Heaven to the dust below. I shall only 
justify a Brahmin using the Jeneu if he is following all those great ideals 
which are enumerated in the Gita. 

3TUST, arffTHT, 3PRPT, 3t|\ijc|q 

(fearlessness, non-violence, not to commit theft and straightforwardness) 
etc. Otherwise there is no good having a Jeneu and doing all sorts of 
things. 

The point is whether we are competent to make any changes, the whole 
history of Hindu society shows that it is continually progressing from 
stage to stage. Otherwise how do you explain the numerious Smritis, 
one Smriti laying down one thing and another Smriti another ? How do 
you explain this ? Society is continuously progressing and something has 
got to be found which is appropriate to the Sadachara or Vyavahara 
Dharma. And the definition of Sanatana Dharma, as given by a great 
Shastri is : 

TFTTrFT: PirM ■jd'i: 

[The eternal is always new.] 

Change is the watch-word of Nature. Change or perish. We have 
a progressive society and it is a dynamic society, as was pointed out 
by Dr. Mookerjee and so we must continuously adapt ourselves to the 
changing circumstances. Of course, that does not mean that there is 
nothing steady or nothing stable. 

Pandit Maitra : Where in Sanskrit literature is the word Sanatana 
defined as the Hon. Minister has just now given out ? Sanatana means 

fHMH : It means eternal. 

That is the etymological meaning of the word. That is the grammatical 
meaning of the word. 

Shri Gadgil : I am not prepared to accept the grammatical 
interpretation of the word Sanatana. 

Shri Bhatt : Kaka Sahib can have his own interpretation. 

Shri Gadgil : That is not of lesser importance. Kaka Sahib also 
knows some Sankrit. The point is through out history, there is the 
Hindu community the tendency to progress. Why should we stop now ? 
Modern conditions require that changes should be effected by legislation 
and not by custom. If to-morrow something else is required, the leaders 
of the day, through the Legislature, will effect that change. I agree that 
this a matter which must be considered in an atmosphere of calmness 
and understanding. If we agree that there are certain evils, why should 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1040 


1040 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

we not remove them ? I remember while speaking on the amendment 
Bill of my hon. friend Shri B. Das regarding the Child Marriage 
Restraint Act. I gave figures from the 1931 census and said that there 
were 1,300 widows below the age of one year. Is not that an evil ? 
And girl widows below the age often there were millions. And if you 
prevent them from re-marriage, just consider what will be the effect 
of it on society ? And only good has come out of the legislation that 
was passed. Today the position is that the average marriage age has 
gone up considerably. The problem now is not of marrying earlier, but 
of marrying at all. 

There was threat of opposition to this measure in 1930 and so great 
was me threat that all the communites were combined against 
the messure. I remember the description given at that time ; 
that before the Act was brought into operation thousands of children 
were taken from Calcutta to Chandernagore and married there, because 
it was not part of Birtish India, that thousands of children were taken 
in the midstream of the Indus and married, because there was no 
extraterritoriality so far as this Act was concerned at that time. This 
element of extra-territoriality was incorporated at the suggestion of 
Mr. B. Das. The point is that there are undoubtedly evils about which 
there is no dispute and it is not anybody’s desire to nurse or keep 
those evils going on. As to whether the remedy should be stringent or 
less stringent is a matter on which the Members of the opposition can 
certainly have a discussion with my Hon. Friend Dr. Ambedkar and a 
via media found out. What I suggest is let this House take some steps 
towards progress and let us go down in history that in spite of real 
or created opposition this House had the courage to take at least one 
step towards the reform of Hindu society. That would be the greatest 
tribute to you individually and collectively and I do hope the whole 
House will rise to the occasion. That does not mean that you should 
accept whatever is suggested nor that you should reject everything 
Let us not have a closed mind : let us have an open mind. Let us 
agree that there is evil in society and let us agree that some remedy 
must be found. This is all that I have to say and I do hope that in 
that spirit the House will respond to the Hindu Code introduced by 
my Hon. Friend Dr. Ambedkar. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Before I call Pandit Kunzru to speak I might 
say that I have been hearing speeches as if on the first reading and not 
on clause 2 which is before the House. Clause 2 consists of four sub- 
clauses and the amendments refer to them. Not many Members have 
addressed themselves to the clause proper. Evidently they want the 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1041 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1041 

House either to accept the option or reject the measure. In fact I thought 
at one stage of accepting closure today 

Several Hon. Members : No, no. 

Pandit Maitra : It is a most important clause, the very life-blood of 
the whole Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am prepared to accept closure even on the tenth day. 

Pandit Maitra : Do it on the 15th day. You make its application 
optional and we will pass it straightaway. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : On this clause at an earlier stage about 17 
or 18 members have already spoken. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal) : All that has been forgotten 
entirely. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : That is why I have allowed references to 
all clauses. The discussion has been on the details of the Bill as a 
whole and not absolutely confined to clause 2. We must see to the 
end of the discussion some time. I therefore, request hon. Members to 
confine themselves to those matters which arise out of clause 2 and the 
amendments to the clause. I do not want to curtail discussion but this 
kind of discussion will be endless. It so happens that whenever I call 
upon Pandit Kunzru to speak I have to make some suggestions to the 
House but they are not intended for him particularly. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : The Hon. Minister who spoke just now has 
to be answered and should we not follow him ? 

Pandit Maitra : We have now been told that this Bill will be 
proceeded with in regard to its first two parts. You will realise easily 
that clauses 2 and 4 are the two fundamental clauses in the whole Code. 
After passing these two you can go ahead at the speed of the Frontier 
or Punjab Mail. The main point is the question of the applicability of 
the law to the communities mentioned. You should not be carried away 
by the mere fact that 16 or 17 Members have spoken. You are going 
to legislate for 30 crores of people and therefore a momentous measure 
like this has to be given serious consideration. If the Bill has been 
taken spasmodically now and then it is no fault of ours. They introduce 
it and at one stage when they meet with opposition they put it by. 
Then they gather strength and come back again. That is no fault of 
ours. If they had taken it up in a special session the House could have 
devoted its whole time and we would have been in a better position to 
know what we said on one day and what are our contentions now. It 
is not the old bill before us : It is a new thing that has come before us. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1042 


1042 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Sardar B. S. Man (Punjab) : Since you, Sir, mentioned the 
closure motion and there is the threat thereof may I request you 
that those Members who have moved amendments as regards certain 
communities should be given their chance so that they may explain 
their view point. I hope closure will not be accepted by you till we 
have had the chance to speak, that is those of us who have moved 
amendments. 

Mr. Depty Speaker : My difficulty was that I looked up for those 
gentlemen who had tabled amendments. Others who had already 
spoken with respect to their amendments I did not call. I picked out 
four of the hon. Members who had tabled amendments and had not 
spoken so far. I was looking round for them to stand. The whole of 
yesterday none of them got up from their seats. Therefore they cannot 
say that no closure can be accepted until they are called to speak, 
if they are not inclined to stand up. Today the hon. Sardar B. S. 
Man sent me a chit saying that he was anxious to speak, because 
yesterday he did not catch my eyes 

Sardar B. S. Man : Even yesterday I stood up. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The general principles of the Bill have 
been already discussed fully in the consideration stage. With respect 
to this clause, whether it ought to apply immediately or it should be 
optional are matters with regard to which amendments have been 
moved. But going into the entire frame-work of the Bill and whether 
it ought to be accepted or not on the analogy of some other pieces 
of legislation, are not, I think, quite relevant. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh) : So far as I am concerned 
I did not stand yesterday to catch your eye in deference to your 
direction or view that you would like to give an opportunity to those 
who have moved amendments after those who had not spoken on 
the previous occasion. That was my reason 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Even if he stands I do not propose to call 
him. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Not even in respect of the new amendments 
I have moved ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have tabulated all the amendments now 
and they have been circulated. No new amendment has been given 
by the hon. Member: they are only repetitions in another form of the 
amendments he had already moved. After I finish with the others I will 
consider those who have already spoken. But as a rule I would not like 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1043 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1043 

to allow any hon. Member to speak, who had spoken already. 
Somehow Dr. Deshmukh was called yesterday when I was not in 
the Chair. If I had been here I would not have called him. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : My amendments fall into two categories : 
one old and the other entirely new. 

Mr. Deputy-Speaker : I shall come to that later, after others 
have been given an opportunity. 

Shri Bhatt : Sir, excuse me. I am sitting opposite to you but 
am not catching your eye. I have been getting up since yesterday. 
You said that those who have given notice of amendments did not 
stand up. May be, there is some forgetfulness on your part. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Order, order, the hon. Member need not 
cast aspersions, that I had not seen him or I did not notice him. 
Hon. Members have no patience to sit and await their chance. 
When they come they expect to be immediately called and if they 
are not, they go away to the lobby. You cannot expect me to bear 
all this in mind. When I make up my mind which hon. Member to 
call next and if he is not in his seat I am entitled to ignore him. 
I cannot call them by the order in my mind one after the other. 
That is not the practice even in the House of Commons. I did not 
find the hon. Member standing up when I was in the Chair. I 
have a note here. I made a note of those Members who have not 
already spoken but have tabled their amendments. But they have 
no patience to sit here and the moment they are not called they 
go away to the lobby. 

Pandit Maitra : There is absolutely no dissatisfaction at what 
you, Sir, have done. I want to assure you that we have the feeling 
that we are all getting an honest and fair deal — absolutely impartial 
deal — from you. We have no feeling against the Chair. 

Pandit Krishna Chandra Sharma (Uttar Pradesh) : May I 
suggest that the words used by Shri Bhatt may be withdrawn ? 

Pandit Maitra : He never meant any objection. 

Shri Bhatt : With your permission, Sir, I want to clarify the 
position. All I wanted to bring to your notice was that I have been 
standing, but perhaps you did not notice it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I shall come to hon. Members who have 
not spoken and who have tabled amendments next. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1044 

1044 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

*Pandit Kunzru (Uttar Pradesh) : If I may say so, I agree 
with you. Sir, that we expected that the debate on the clause. But 
important questions of concerned with the merits of the clause. 
But important questions of principle were raised yesterday and I 
see that the minds of hon. Members are coloured by what was said 
in the course of yesterday’s debate. It is therefore unfortunately 
necessary to say something on these points so that the prejudice 
created agains those parts of the bill that we are going to discuss 
may be removed. 

My hon. friend, Shri N.V. Gadgil has dealt admirably with 
some of the points that were raised yesterday, and I venture to 
say something more on this subject because I feel that what was 
said yesterday ignores not merely the spirit of Hindu Law but 
the changes that are already taking place in Hindu society. In 
considering the Bill before us it is not enough that we should 
confine our attention to the provisions of the Bill. It is necessary 
that we should understand the character of the society for which 
we are legislating ; Its most important character is change; it is in 
a state of transition. To mention only one important factor that is 
vitally affecting our society, a great deal of awakening has taken 
place among our sisters during the last twenty-five years. They have 
happily become conscious of their just rights and they are making 
organised efforts in support of their just demands. It is partly to 
the credit of these educated and enlightened women that this Bill 
has been placed before us. But we have to add to this the fact that 
education is fast growing amongst women 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri : You mean Western education ? 

Pandit Kunzru : The education that you have received and 
in spite of which you claim to be a good Hindu. Our sisters are 
receiving the same education and there is no reason to suppose 
that they will become denationalized or adopt an attitude of 
disrespect towards their religion or culture. Our women are 
receiving education in ever-increasing numbers. They will enjoy 
the franchise on a footing of equality, complete equality, with men. 
Is it conceivable that in a society that is being moulded by such 
forces inequalities between men and women will be tolerated for 
any length of time ? Those who use the name of religion in order 
to defend social ineuqalities and social injustice are doing the worst 
service they can to Hindu religion. There is nothing, I venture to 
say, in those provisions of the Bill that we are going to discuss 


P. D. Vol. XV, Part II, 18th September 1951, pp .2772-77. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1045 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1045 

in this session that is in any way in conflict with the best principles 
of Hindu Law or with the spirit that has always underlaid it. 

What are the main features of the bill so far as we are going 
to discuss it now ? They are monogamy and divorce. As regards 
monogamy, my hon. friend, Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee said 
realistically yesterday that in view of what had taken place in the 
past it was too late today to contend that this Parliament was not 
competent to undertake legislation in respect of social reform. He 
also said that he would be prepared to support monogamy if the 
Muslims were brought within the purview of the Bill. I remember 
distinctly that when the general principles underlying the bill were 
discussed, some speakers expressed the fear that Hindu society 
was being compelled to imitate the Muslim society in respect to 
inheritance. We know that among Muslims daughters have a share 
in the father’s property. Yet, we were not in favour of assimilation 
between Hindus and Muslims in this respect. What right have we 
now to ask that no legislation should be undertaken in respect of 
Hindu marriage unless it applies as much to the Muslims as it 
will do the Hindus ? People who are not prepared to allow women 
to have a share in the property of their fathers have no right to 
ask that the law relating to marriage that is applied to the Hindus 
should in all respects be applicable to the Muslims also. 

The arguments that have been put forward now were carefully 
considered by the Hindu Law Committee. I should like to remined 
the House of what this Committee said with regard the objections 
that had been urged after considering them one by one, it came to 
the conclusion that they were either far-fetched or had no relation 
to existing facts and then said: 

“We have accordingly decided to retain the provision for monogamy 
in the draft Code. It will prevent the husband from deserting the 
wife at will and contracting a second marriage. There is a substantial 
body of evidence before us that cases of desertion and re-marriage 
are increasing and this problem is best solved by enacting monogamy 
as a rule of law.” 

I think that the observation of the Committee has great force 
and those who oppose monogamy on any ground must deal with the 
concrete reasons put forward by the Committee in favour of proposing 
monogamy. The Committee drew attention to the fact that monogamy 
had been enforced by law in the State of Bombay. Legislation was 
undetaken there four or five years ago to prevent polygamy amongst 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1046 


1046 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Hindus. We can now say that there is a similar law in the State 
of Madras. Indeed the State of Baroda where there was a Hindu 
ruler and whether the large majority of the people were Hindus 
passed a law many years ago in favour of monogamy and divorce. 

Shri D. D. Pant (Uttar Pradesh) : The Ruler violated it. 

Pandit Kunzru : If the Hindus in all these places have violated 
Hindu Law, then where can you find real Hindus — only in this 
House ? 

It was yesterday that the demand was put forward that the Bill 
should be made permissive, that is, the enforcement of the provisions 
should be left to the States. Now, here are two important States in 
which the principle of monogamy is already in force. There are other 
parts of the country also, for instance, the district of Malbar and 
the State of Travancore-Cochin, where legislation has been passed 
to prevent polygamy amongst Hindus. In view of this and in view of 
the fact that it was freely admitted in the debate yesterday that in 
a large majority of cases, in an overwhelming majority of cases, the 
marriages were monogamous, on what ground can anybody now ask 
that provision relating to monogamy should be made permissive ? 
This is the only provision of the bill that is not permissive but 
compulsory, and it is compulsory for a very good reason. It will be 
compulsory, but that principle appears to have been accepted by 
Hindu society at large. In those places where it prevails Hindu law 
has not been subverted. There are as good Hindus there as there 
are amongst the Hindu Members of this House. I think therefore 
that my hon. Friend Dr. Ambedkar is on strong ground when he 
asks that we should lay down as a rule of law that monogamy 
should prevail amongst the Hindus in this country. 

The next point that I should like to deal with is divorce. Here 
too it is asked that the provisions should be made permissive. But 
they are already permissive. Unhappy couples will not be under 
a compulsion when this law is passed to rush to a court of law 
and ask for immediate divorce. It will depend upon them whether 
they will take advantage of the provisions of the law. What more 
can be done in order to remove fears and in order to enable only 
those people who find the existing conditions intolerable to seek 
either separation or complete divorce ? The Hindu Law Committee, 
dealing with this point, said : 

“From the evidence adduced before us we should think that there 
are thousands of women in British India who have been deserted by 
their husbands.” 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1047 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1047 

Then it goes on to say : 

"Many hard cases were also brought to our notice by other witnesses 
in which re-marriage was both desired and possible but could not be 
effected by reason of the existing law. The number of these cases may 
not be relatively large and reckoned in terms of percentage the problem 
may not appear to be a formidable one. But as we have already stated 
there are thousands of such cases in India and if even a small proportion 
of these women desire a divorce with a view to getting themselves 
remarried the question is whether the law should say upto them ‘nay’. 
Evidence was brought before us that in many cases re-marriage is quietly 
celebrated and that society tolerates and recognises such remarriage.” 

Here, again, the facts are incontestably against the view that there 
is no need for having a provision for divorce in our marriage law. 
No one is compelled to take advantage of it. There is no reason why 
for the sake of the patient sufferers, those who seek relief should 
be denied. I have already referred to some of the States where 
monogamy is legally in force. I may add that the law allows divorce 
in all the States mentioned by me in respect of monogamy. Now what 
has happened to Hindu society there ? Has the sanctity of marriage 
become less than it was before ? Do not the Hindus there regard the 
tie of marriage as a sacramental tie ? Have they no respect for Hindu 
religion or Hindu culture ? 

Pandit Maitra : The sample is here. 

Pandit Kunzru : I should very much like to see a discourse 
between my hon. Friend Pandit Maitra and the people of the States 
mentioned by me on this point. He will not find it easy to convince 
them that they are inferior to him in their regard for Hindu culture 
and Hindu society. 

Pandit Maitra : Then leave it to individual areas to legislate : 
why force it here ? 

Pandit Kunzru : I have already pointed out that there are so 
many areas in which this law is in force. In the second place I have 
taken pains to point out that the provision will be permissive. What 
do you mean by asking that it should be permissive ? 

Pandit Maitra : Make it optional for all. 

Pandit Kunzru : It will be optional for unhappy partners to seek 
relief under this law or not. Nobody is going to compel them either 
to separate or to seek divorce. What more do you want ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1048 


1048 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The law in Baroda has probably been in force for a much longer time 
than in the States of Bombay and Madras. But it appears from the 
evidence given before the Hindu Law Committee that both in 1940-41 
and 1941-42 the number of suits by persons belonging to castes in which 
custom does not allow divorce was three only. My hon. friend Dr. Syama 
Prasad Mookerjee said yesterday that if 90 per cent, of the people could 
already get divorce, where was the need for bringing the remaining ten 
per cent, who were following a higher law and who regard marriage as 
indissoluble. Well, I am sorry that he is not in his place. But I should 
like to point this out to him. 

Besides, we all know what is happening in Hindu society. If a husband 
drinks and beats his wife, or deserts her, is this a sacramental act ? Is 
this in accordance with the sacred character of Hindu marriage ? An 
hon. member behind me ask : “Why not check it ?” 

Pandit Maitra : There are also wives who beat their husbands. 

Pandit Kunzru : I do not say that the wives are impeccable. Wives 
have their own faults, but the law will apply not merely to wives but 
also to husbands. In view of this it is idle to claim that the upper strata 
of Hindu society, that is men belonging to the Brahmin, Kshatriya and 
Vaishya castes have a higher ideal than the members of the other castes. 

Again, it has been said that this Bill has caused a great deal of 
perturbation in Hindu society. I find that this is due to the fact that 
people are misinformed with regard to the provisions of the Bill. When the 
provisions are explained to them a good many of their misapprehensions 
disappear, and I have no doubt that if those who assiduously voice the 
fears of the people in this House will take a little trouble to explain 
what its provisions really are 

Pandit Maitra : Let the government do it. 

Pandit Kunzru : much of the dissatisfaction that exists will 

disappear. 

Government is doing what it can to spread a correct knowledge of the 
provisions of the Bill, but is it not the duty of those people who believe 
in truth and in the spirituality that underlies Hindu law to take a hand 
in this good work ? Why should they not seek to remove the prejudice 
that has been wrongly created against the Bill. 

Pandit Maitra : Leave it to them to decide. 

Pandit Kunzru : My hon. Friend disregards facts completely. I confess 
that I am powerless to convince him.... 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1049 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1049 

Pandit Maitra : It is my misfortune also. 

Pandit Kunzru : if he continues to shut his eyes to facts 

Pandit Maitra : I am looking straight at them. 

Pandit Kunzru : and says that nobody in India has before the 

introduction of this Bill ever heard of the words monogamy and divorce. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : Monogamy means monotony. 

Pandit Kunzru : I think that those who are supporting the principle 
that underlies the provisions that we are considering, who are trying 
to bring about complete equality between men and women, who are 
trying to renovate Hindu society, who are asking it to go back to the 
great principles that once made it great and the envy of the world, are 
rendering the greatest service they can to Hindu religion and culture. I 
hope that they will persevere in the path they have chosen themselves 
and make Hindu religion as respected throughout the world now as it 
was some centuries ago. 

*Shri Bhatt : (English translation of the speech) Sir, I am being 
asked to speak in English, but as ill luck would have it, I cannot speak 
in English. I cannot express my ideas and feelings as suitably in that 
language as I can in Hindustani. I may be excused for that. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : Sir, we do not understand high-flow Hindi and 
we cannot follow if the hon. Member speaks swiftly. We can understand 
if he speaks slowly. 

Shri Bhatt : I have not taken the floor simply in order to reply to 
what the Hon. Minister has said, but I am here to express my own ideas. 
We are going to perform a big task and curs is a Herculean endeavour. 
We are descendants of Bharat and Bhagirath, Rama and Krishna, Manu 
and Yagnavalkya. The systematisation and codification of Hindu Law 
in such a way that we may be in a position to apply, it to our lives, is 
a Herculean effort. As Shri Gour has said about England: 

“Various attempts have been made to codify the laws of England but 

the attempts have so far failed.” 

England is a progressive country and yet its laws could not be 
codified. In our country where there are so many complications and 
anomalies and customs have a very heterogeneous character, the 
magnitude of our task is indeed great. As Hon. Minister Kaka Sahib 
Gadgil said, if we do not perform this task, how would we be able to 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 18th September 1951, pp. 2815-35. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1050 

1050 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

bring the divine Ganges and Yamuna to the plains as Bhagirath did ? 
I congratulate him on his courage. We also want to help him and 
not impede his efforts. I want to say that things should be done at 
an appropriate time and by suitable methods. I do not say that Hon. 
Pandit Kunzru wants to deprive the Hindu Shastras of their sanctity 
and importance but at the same time I do not like that we should 
drift towards materialism and see things only from the point of view 
of our convenience. We do not want to make his law only to prove its 
ineffectiveness in the long run. Our Hindu Shastras have also been 
amended. Today they call Dr. Ambedkar as Manu, Shri Gadgil is 
called Yagnavalkya and Shri Gadgil can give any such name to Shri 
Naziruddin Ahmad also. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar) : Call him Narad. 

Shri Bhatt : It is difficult to say today whether we have made any 
progress or have gone back. I would say that from the point of view 
of food, clothing and living, we have the same standard which our 
ancestors had during the Mughal period. Is our standard of living 
the same as obtained 150 years back ? Do we have the same facilities 
which we had thirty years back ? Applying this standard, we can not 
say that we have progressed. Can we say that we have made progress 
simply because we have passed more laws ? Or shall we say we have 
progressed as we have become more healthy and courageous and have 
become true Aryans ? This is a difficult question ; I cannot answer it 
nor have I the time to do so. It is a new subject and I do not want to 
go into its different aspects. I shall try to confine my remarks only to 
my amendments and clause 2. Our Smritis and Shastras have kept 
changing according to times. I agree with the Hon. Minister in that 
we have our Dharma Shastras. Shri Maitra may interprete them in 
one way. Shri Gadgil in another ; Dr. Ambedkar may ex-pound them 
in his own way and my interpretation may be different from those 
of all these gentlemen, though I am not a scholar of Shastras; all I 
want to say is that our religion, our Smritis and our Shastras are 
eternal. Changes have taken place in them and new things have 
been incorporated in them at times changed. They change with time 
and place and never lag behind. Without showing disrespect to the 
scriptures of any other religion or community I want to say that the 
Hindu Shastras and tradition live to this day ; that is why Hinduism 
has kept place with time. It is in that sense that I consider them as 
eternal. 


Pandit Malaviya : After the code has been passed it will not remain so. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1051 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1051 

Shri Bhatt : We don’t want to frighten them. I remember that the 
Hindu Code Bill Committee prepared a draft of the Bill and it was 
presented to the House in April, 1947. In the statement of Objects and 
Reasons was this sentence : “There is a growing public opinion in favour 
of codification and a uniform code.” Beides this our hon. Kaka Saheb 
Says, “It is difficult to say which side is stronger” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : In the Official Report it will be difficult to 
understand who “Kaka Saheb” is. 

Shri Bhatt : I admit the truth of what you say. As Kaka Saheb i.e, 
the Hon. Minister Shri Gadgil said just now and others said yesterday, 
that the English knowing people and even those who do not know 
English but have progressive views, agree to this. But if this is true, 
why do so many demonstrations take place against this Bill ? Both sides 
demonstrate. Abound the Parliament House, those who are in favour of 
the Code Bill and those who are against it, both of them demonstrate. 
I know both sides have scholars and intelligent people among them and 
also men and women. 

Dr. Ambedkar : They are all lunatics. They are out because our 
lunatic asylums are too small. 

Shri Bhatt : Then Hon. Dr. Ambedkar says that those who are 
opposing the Bill are lunatics. I beg to submit with respect that I want 
to stand against this statement. If you call them lunatics, they would 
call you a hundred times bigger lunatic. I want to emphasise that if a 
person calls his opponents lunatics, he is living in an age with which 
we are fed up. During British Rule, such Government was here as 
neither listened to, nor tolerated what others thought. I don’t agree to 
Dr. Ambedkar’s statement, who has been compared to Manu, that his 
opponents are lunatics and are out because our lunatic asylums are too 
small. I agree 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : May I say that we are losing all the humour 
because the hon. Member is speaking in Hindi. Those who know Hindi 
understand but we are not following him at all. 

Pandit Malaviya : It is not humour but grim humour. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab) : My hon. Friend does not 
understand, otherwise he would be somewhere else according to Dr. 
Ambedkar. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : I understood Dr. Ambedkar to say that those 
who were opposed to this Bill are mad. Is that in order ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1052 


1052 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: He has not said so. 

Shri Bhatt: I was saying that Dr. Ambedkar may hold certain 
views and ray views may be different. After 1947 this Bill was sent 
to a Select Committee, which presented its report in August 1948. 
After that this bill again came up for discussion. As you are aware 
sir, our Government does not want to hurt anybody, nor does it want 
to do anything which might create a sensation among the people. 
So our Government consulted Pandits. Dr. Ambedkar also listened 
to what certain Pandits had to say. He gave them an opportunity 
to put forward their views, though not to their heart’s content, but 
they were given an opportunity all right. I do not know whether he 
accommodated their viewpoint or not, but after that he put forward 
something new and amended it. Now he is bringing forward new 
amendments every day and that is good ; there is nothing wrong in 
it. He wants that he should bring round his opponents, and taking 
their grievances into consideration, put forward an agreed legislation. 
With this idea in mind the Government have introduced this Bill 
and we are discussing clause 2 of the same. This Bill contains many 
different things, but if I have rightly understood, for the time being 
only two parts, viz., those relating to marriage and divorce are to be 
taken up. If we are going to take up only one thing as suggested by 
Shri Gadgil, who has expressed the hope that it would demonstrate 
our might. I would request them to stop there if they have any idea 
of what is practicable. I repeat what I said in an earlier speech ; 
and that is the Government should wait till the next House is 
elected within four or five months. Those who will get elected to 
the next House, will put this question before their electorate, before 
the people. This has become a burning question and it will remain 
before them. Put it before the people and the members of the next 
Parliament will get a mandate from them on this question or will 
tell their electorates what they would do when they sit in the new 
House. While speaking on the Child Marriage Restraint Bill in 1929, 
Qaid-e-Azam Jinnah had said, “It is necessary that children under 
14 should not be allowed to marry. If my electorate does not agree 
to this, I will resign from the House, and they may elect somebody 
else to represent them”. We should be definite about what we 
want. The idea that we should not antagonise anybody, now that 
we have reached the last stage, should not enter our calculations. 
The best possible draft of the Bill should be put forward before us 
and we should clearly know as to how far we are to go. Why should 
you put only one thing before us ? We have to scrutinise every 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1053 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1053 

clause. Dr. Ambedkar has become so impatient that he wants to 
bring forth a child, no matter if it is blind, devoid of limbs or unable 
to move. What he wants is a son so that he may have somebody to 
offer Pindas to him. 

An hon. Member : So that he may get deliverance ? 

Shri Bhatt: Pardon me. May he live for a thousand years ; I am 
speaking only figuratively. If Dr. Ambedkar and Pandit Jawaharlal 
feel so strongly about passing the Bill, we will bring round those 
who have been termed as lunatics. Use whatever methods you like to 
bring them round, to repress them, we are with you and may be we 
would also come under your influence but please refrain from passing 
a legislation that is incomplete, invalid and base. On the contrary it 
should be lofty. Why do you say that you do this and you do that just 
to accommodate us ? Don’t do it if you think it is not right. If we are 
elected to the next House we will say with more courage that we are 
armed with the mandate of the people on this question and we are 
not going to bow to the directives of anybody else. We will bow only 
to the will of the people. I am a quiet man and do not wish to prolong 
my remarks on this point. A couple of days back I had occasion to 
go to a factory. People working there asked me what all this fuss 
about the Hindu Code Bill was. I countered that question With the 
remark as to why they were afraid of this measure. They said “This 
is going to put an end to our religion, there would be chaos in our 
society and we will deteriorate.” So I had a talk with them. Many of 
them were intelligent people, who had read the draft Bill. We should 
not think that those who are opposing this Bill are doing so without 
understanding it. They referred to the provision about divorce and 
said that these days they can get divorce more easily according to 
the prevalent customs. “Why should you”, they said, “drag us into the 
court and make us say that a woman is immoral and make the women 
accuse their men of adultery ? It is better to discuss these thing in our 
Panchayats and people who understand the truth about a particular 
couple will separate them.” Now, this needs a lot of consideration. Will 
Dr. Ambedkar argue that divorce rules, wherever they operate are 
very lenient and should not be so because that will endanger Hindu 
religion ? Hindu religion is not endangered because of that. There 
are others who say that Hindu religion will be endangered if this 
Bill is passed. We have to tax our brains to see which side is right. 
Everybody has to think. Then I asked those people in the factory as to 
what else they had in their minds. Then they mentioned the problem 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1054 


1054 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of the share of the daughter in her father’s property. What I want 
to show is that those who are opposing the Bill are not lunatics 
and that they are not acting without intelligence. Some members of 
the Adarsh Mahila Sangh came to me and put the same question. 
Now they are also wise and reasonable. No doubt, the hon. Member 
Shri Renuka Ray, Shrimati Durgabai or other lady members are 
wiser and more well-read. But that does not mean that women 
outside this House do not understand the significance of things 
or, as somebody said, that they are mere blockheads. The ladies 
I referred to just now, started discussing and said that we should 
do nothing that may bring down the whole structure of society. We 
have opened a way by passing the Civil Marriages Act. Persons 
marrying under this Act can also give divorce. Why should we go 
further ? Let our customs remain as they are. We do not say that 
a certain person should not do a certain thing. Gradually people 
would begin to understand. 

Shri Kunzru has spoken about monogamy. People don’t have 
enough to live on. In many cases it is difficult to support one wife 
even, how can everybody support two ? Muslims are allowed to 
have as many as four wives, but has everybody four wives ? In 
very few cases, men have two wives and very rarely one has four. 
I could not obtain census figures in this respect. Our Statistics 
Department is still far behind. The question now is, how Muslims 
came to be allowed to have four wives at a time. Hazrat Mohammad 
fought the battle of Ohad in which a large number of men were 
killed. The result was a preponderance of women over men, for the 
protection and upkeep of whom those who could support upto four 
wives were ordered to take that number of women as wives. This 
thing has happened in Germany and France at different times. In 
our country there is more or less a parity between the numbers 
of men and women. The number of women is some thousands less 
than that of men. 

(Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava in the Chair) 

But if, unfortunately, the number of women goes up by two 
crores, a new legislation will have to be passed to meet the 
new situation. I am going into detail to show that our laws 
were made according to the demands of time and place and 
even now they are being made according to the same standards. 
Dr. Ambedkar wants a legislation of that sort but that legislation 
should have the effect of healing. In our country marriage is 
not a matter of convenience only. He may be of the view that 
marriage is merely a contract, pure and simple. These words have 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1055 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1055 

been used by leading lawyers. But the basis of our society is not only 
materialism. Our society is based on our ancient Shastras — the Shastras 
pertaining to agriculture, zoology and sociology. From the point of view 
of genesis the horse and the ass, belong to the same genus, as all of 
us are human beings. But human beings differ in different countries. A 
person likes the same sort of climate and environment in which he has 
been brought up. The same is the case with other living beings. Take 
somebody from Hissar to a new place and see the reaction. Take the 
case of trees for instance. Can a tree from Kashmir thrive in Rajasthan ? 
Many attempts were made to plant mango trees in Rajasthan but they 
all failed. After all there is some principle behind it. Land, seed, water 
and climate, every factor has something to do with it. You can’t plant 
a tree anywhere. The same is the case with marriages. You can’t marry 
somebody to anybody. Even for trees one has to consider which tree can 
be grafted upon another. I don’t want to go into details. My point is that 
our society is based on certain political, educational, hygienic, eugenic 
and sexological principles. If you want any proof of this, I will quote 
a portion of Dr. Bhagwan Das’s long speech which he delivered while 
presenting his Hindu Marriage Validity Bill. In this speech he quoted 
many things from the Shastras. Dr. Bhagwan Das said : 

“The hygienic and eugenic and sexological principle is that every 
possible care and caution should be exercised and all possible cleanliness 
and purity secured in respect of food and marriage and that persons 
with similarity of tastes and habits and purity of temperament should 
dine together and marry together so that the individual and racial-health 
and happiness may be promoted.” 

I do not see much in eating and dining. Even before Gandhiji I did not 
believe in this. But if you ask me to dine with a fish-eater I would ask 
to be excused. I do not consider him an untouchable, but I have formed 
a habit. If somebody asks me to marry a certain woman 

Dr. Ambedkar : There are not so many fish that could be supplied 
to everybody. 

Shri Bhatt : I was going through census figures and my friend Shri 
Sidhva and others may pardon me, when I say that I found from the 
census that many men marry at the age of 60 even. I, for one, do not 
want to marry. 

I was saying that compulsion cannot be used in regard to our way of 
life. One’s way of life should be according to one’s own temperament. It 
will come about after some time, if not today. I am sure that Panditji, 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1056 


1056 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

in whatever he does, will have the country’s interest before him ; that is 
why we consider him as our leader. We would not consider him as our 
leader if we did not have any faith in him. In the same way we believe 
that whatever our parents will do, will be allright for us. If we do not 
have any faith in them we will ourselves seek our mates but then we 
shall take into account our nature, habits and convenience. Our faith is 
based on these things and we should not make any such law as my create 
difficulties for the society, or spread discontent. After all, the object of 
every legislation is to make society happy and prosperous. But if people 
think that a certain legislation brings them disaster, bring them round 
to your point of view. If Dr. Ambedkar is so particular about this Bill 
let him address a meeting of a lakh of people and explain to them the 
benefits that will accrue from it. At the same time a pandit, an opponent 
of the Bill, should also put forward his point of view. If those one lakh 
people were to express their views by means of a secret ballot, may be 
that would satisfy you. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: That will be the end. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Take a secret ballot in this very House 
and it will be the end. 

Shri Bhatt: You are afraid and that is why you do not put it before the 
people. There was only one person, and that was Gandhiji who believed 
in putting everything before the people. He thought that untouchability 
should be abolished. The capatalists threatened to boycott him. When 
Gandhiji went to the Mulji Jetha Market of Bombay to collect money 
for the Tilak Swarajya Fund and asked for a crore of rupees for that 
fund, the capatalists said that they would give not one but five crores, 
only if Mahatmaji expunged the abolition of untouchability from his 
programme. Mahatmaji replied that on that condition he did not want 
even a single pie from them, not to say of five crores of rupees. He 
said that he would stand by his principles and march forward towards 
Swarajya. It is the duty of the Government to go to the people. We 
are ordinary men, have not studied the Shastras to any great extent. 
You have wisdom, go to the Pandits, to the Shankaracharya, who 
is opposing it, go to those women who are against it and whom you 
want to make happy and try to persuade them. I don’t think that this 
Bill is going to benefit only the women. I do not consider this to be 
a Magna Charta for women only. You are trying to benefit the whole 
of the society and I thank you for that. You should bear this in mind 
that the subject under discussion is not new. Not to talk of 1942, in 
1937 Dr. Deshmukh had introduced a Bill which brought this matter 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1057 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1057 

to the foreground. In 1856 Shri Ishwar Chandra Vidyasagar and 
Raja Ram Mohan Roy brought about reforms like widow remarriage. 
These things have been going on. Authorities and commentators of our 
religious scriptures have writen different things about the subject. I 
don’t ask you not to pass this legislation. But why are you doing it 
today ? Why are you so impatient ? 

Please be good enough to wait for some time. General Elections are 
imminent and the new House will meet in May next year. At that time 
you may bring forward the best of legislations and pass it. Some of 
the present Members may again be elected and if I again sit in this 
Houser I will take part in the deliberations. But before that put the 
final draft of the Bill before the people and do not have an incomplete 
legislation and say — “Gokul Bhai, please get it passed”. I do not want 
this. Give me something wholesome to eat. If you give me something 
dirty to eat or say that I should eat controlled rice, because nothing 
better is available. I won’t have it. I will have something good to eat. 
It is another thing that hunger may compel me but if there is an 
alternative food I will prefer that. I would rather eat leaves of trees 
than eat anything dirty. So I request you to postpone this Bill. You 
have accommodated us to some extent and I want to thank you for 
that. I congratulate you on your sagacity because you have met the 
demands of time. But be more liberal and go a step forward. I would 
also ask my sisters what good would accrue to them if it is passed 
just now and how they would come to harm if it is delayed by four 
months. The skies would not fall, nobody would come to harm nor is 
there any question of monetary advantage if it is passed. That is why 
I am making this request. 

I again refer to the talk I had with some people in a factory. They 
want the question of divorce to be settled according to custom. But 
what are Customs ? Customs have a great influence, even Dr. Ambedkar 
won’t deny this. What I am opposed to is that you want to do away 
with our customs. That will not work at least for some years to come. If 
you want to take the backward classes with you you will have to slow 
down your pace. Only in that case shall we follow you. Mahatmaji was 
very progressive. When Shri M. N. Roy came to the Faizpur Congress 
and began discussing Communism with Mahatmaji, he (Mahatamji) 
said, I was not there. I am telling you what I came to know about their 
conversation — “Mr. Roy, say whatever you want to say in the strongest 
possible words about present day society and capitalists”. Mr. Roy 
made a strong and lengthy speech. Then Mahatmaji said, “Is that all ?” 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1058 


1058 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

And after that Mahatmaji replied in a few words which took only 
some minutes. Mr. Roy was surprised and asked if Mahatmaji felt 
that way. Mahatmaji said — “You don’t know me well enough. I shall 
put forward my ideas, as our society makes progress. I know our 
society is backward and many ideas have not developed to the extent 
to which they should have. But I have to carry the people along 
with me.” That is why I say, however high the ideas and whatever 
happiness they might bring, what are you Dr. Ambedkar going to 
achieve with 15, 20 or 25 members of the Cabinet, if we are not 
with you. I see that many people belonging to the majority accept 
certain thing because Shri Nehru or Dr. Ambedkar has asked them 
to do so, but if I do it, who will follow me ? I repeat that I will be 
deceiving you if I did not tell you that people do not want it in this 
way. I don’t want to deceive you. As we are your followers so are our 
electorate with us. We have to see to their good and convenience. 
It has been said, as you know, “Shastra rurhi baliyasi” i.e., custom 
overrides the Shastras. After all, laws are made by men, so were 
the Shastras. When our customs have claims of precedence over 
Shastras., why can’t our society override our laws ? I ask you to 
take this into consideration. 

There is one more drawback which I would like to point out. Shri 
Kunzru is not in his seat, I would ask Dr. Ambedkar to excuse me. 
We have become so thoughtless that when the westerners say that 
our marriage laws and ceremonies are very good, we will agree 
with them. “When Max Muller says that our sastras, upanishads 
and vedas are the best in the world, we take that to be true and 
quote him. But our own commentators and authorities have said 
the same things in a better way, yet nobody cares to go through 
their writings. 

I have been just now told the copies of ‘Yagnavalkya Smriti’ 
could not be available in the whole of Delhi city even on payment. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have got so many copies with me. 

Shri Bhatt: If you have got the copies please lend them to 
us ; they are not to be found in the Library. Sanskar Kaustuba 
and Yagnavalkya Smriti could not be found in the Library. You 
have got all these things, you might have personally purchased 
them; you are thirsty after knowledge and a lover of learning ; 
not only that, you are a learned scholar and a Pandit as well. 
But please place those copies in the library for some time so 
that we too may have change to benefit ourselves by those books, 
and may be able to have the necessary information. I have 
never been impressed with the translation of Gitanjali done by 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1059 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1059 

Yeats, because it has always been my endeavour, and I had made 
up my mind in this connection when I was at College, not to read 
Rabindra Nath’s Gitanjali until I had learnt Bengali. I have always 
held that it is useless to read such a work without having the 
knwoledge of the language in which it was originally written. I have 
not been able to learn Tamil so far, but I would try to learn it, such 
has been my tendency from my early days. When I saw Gitanjali 
in original and its translation by Keats. I found a lot of difference. 
The translation did not contain anything worthwhile. Compared to 
it the translations in vernacular languages are much better. I have 
seen a more beautiful translation in Marathi done in Abhanga metre 
by some person under a pseudonym. But unfortunately we Indians 
generally close our eyes to those things which are our own and when 
somebody from outside throw light on them we exclaim ‘Yes now 
we have seen’. I would like to ask after all what flood lights are 
opened before our eyes by the foreigners which dazzle our eyes and 
we begin to appreciate those things ? After all what are the defects 
in our own lights ? What do you think is missing in the lights that 
we have ? We should try to understand our own things in the right 
prespective and after a full realization should gladly make the 
necessary changes in them so that everybody may be satisfied and 
it may be in the interests of all. 

Now, I come to the point as to what a Hindu really means and 
wherefrom has this word Hindu come ? Sir, you would excuse me 
if I would take a few minutes more to throw light on this. My 
submission is that I do not like to go into the historical facts nor 
do I want to go into Greek and Iranian histories. Neither do I 
want to go into the details as to what relations we had with Iran 
and Greece in the past; but I would only make an attempt as to 
wherefrom has this word ‘Hindu’ come. My amendment wholly 
relates to this very thing. One opinion about the origin of the word 
‘Hindu’ is that there were two cities in Gandharva Desh, one of 
them was known by ‘Hindas’ from which the word ‘Hindu’ has been 
derived. The second opinion is that the word ‘Hindu’ is derived 
from the word ‘Sindhu’ the great river that we had according to 
Philology letter ‘S’ has changed into letter ‘H’ and in this way the 
word ‘Sindhu’ changed in to the word ‘Hindu’. The word Hinduani 
occurs at several places. It is difficult to ascertain the source of this 
word. I visited Central Secretariat Library but found it to be too 
poor. I have never seen a poorer library than this one. I asked for 
books related to this matter but I was told that they had no special 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1060 


1060 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

collections on this subject, further adding that only some articles 
might have appeared in annual numbers of certain magazines here 
and there on this subject. That was all and there was nothing more in 
that Library. As against this, had I gone to the Royal Asiatic Society 
I could have definitely got some better and useful material, but, 
unfortunately. I did not find time to go there. Sometimes the Press 
Bill and sometimes this Hindu Code Bill and other things detained 
me here. Anyhow, I do not go into the details as to wherefrom has 
this word ‘Hindu’ come and what its origin actually is. But one thing 
need be kept in view that the word ‘Hindu’ means the people who 
inhabit this land of Hindu i.e., the whole of Bharat. All the people 
living in this land are Hindus, whether you call them by the name 
Arya or Dasyu. There were only two classes of people inhabiting India 
in the past; one was known as Arya and the other as Dasyu, but 
in spite of this distinctional of them were ‘Hindus’. Hence, I would 
like to know what meaning should be attached to the word ‘Hindu’ 
in the Bill which is going to be passed into an Act now. After all 
how many persons have been consulted as has been mentioned in 
the report and as was stated by Shri Kunzru ? How many persons 
have given their opinions and how many of them have been included 
in it ? But I do not want to bring in all those things. 

Dr. Bhagwan Das, while discussing the Marriage Validity Act, 
explained as to who was a Hindu. He said that Hindu was not merely 
a nationality. When ‘Shariat’ Act was introduced in the House most 
probably in the year 1937, his sufi friend gave the definition of a 
Musalman which I read out here. While introducing the Bill in the 
course of his speech he said : 

“Islam has scores of sects but the belief in Mohammed seems 
necessary for all, though I am told that some sects do not consider 
the second part of Kalema of faith as essential and indispensable and 
regard Mohammed as one of the many prophets sent by God to help 
humanity on earth.” 

While replying that point and repudiating that view Sir Yamin 
Khan (Agra Division) said : 

“There is no Muslim who believes in this. It is essential for a Muslim 
to believe in both the parts of the Kalema, namely ‘La ilaha illallah’ 
and “Mohammed Rasulullah”. 

To this Dr. Bhagwan Das remarked “I have heard it from a Sufi 
friend”. In reply Mr. Yamin Khan said : “Those who do not believe 
in the second part cannot be called Muslims.” 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1061 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1061 

In this way what I beg to submit is that I have suggested in my 
amendment that those persons, who have left Hindu religion and 
embraced any other faith but whose social customs are still like those of 
the Hindu Society, should be given the privilege to have this Hindu Code 
applied to them if they so desire. When Hindus are going to benefit by 
this Code why don’t you allow others too to have its benefits ? After all 
what objection have you got to that ? There are some Indian Christians 
whose social customs are like those of the Hindus notwithstanding that 
they have embraced Christainity. As such why do you exclude them from 
its application, and why don’t you allow them to have the benefits of 
the Code in the same manner as the Hindus would have ? 

I, therefore, request the Hon. Doctor to keep all these things in 
view. Should I state which of the non-Hindu communities can benefit 
by it ? I do not want to go into detail, but I certainly want to draw his 
attention to it. Take for instance, Dr. Gour and Mr. Gupta who are 
great authorities on Hindu Law. They have given the names of those 
non-Hindu communities to whom this Code can apply. About Kutchi 
Memons 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : You know it, he too knows it, but we 
do not know it. Kindly read them out. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Do not be brief. But please read them out. 

Shri Bhatt: The Memon Act which has been framed 

Dr. Ambedkar : Do not mind about the time, but please read them 
out. 

Shri Bhatt: I am going to read it out. It is laid down in the Kutchi 
Memon Act: 

“Whereas it is expedient to enable those Kutchi Memons who so 
desire to be governed in matters of succession and inheritance by the 
Mohmmedan law, it is hereby enacted”. 

The operative section is : 

“Any Kutchi Memon who has attained the age of majority and is 
resident in British India may by declaration in the prescribed form and 
filed before the prescribed authority, declare that he desires to obtain 
the benefit of the Act, and thereafter the declarant and all his minor 
children and the descendants shall, in all matters of succession and 
inheritance, be governed by Mohammedan law.” 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : It is an optional clause. So there is a 
precedent. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1062 


1062 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Bhatt: So I hope the Hon. Minister of Law would keep 
some sort of provision in it in the same manner in which some 
laxity has been allowed in the above clause, otherwise you are only 
limiting its scope. The then Home Member Mr. Henry Craik made 
a mention of it in his speech and said: 

“I think it deserves very careful consideration, whether it is not 
wise in those matters to give the individual the option and not to 
compel him to accept a rule or law of which he may be imperfectly 
informed.” 

Shri B. Das (Orissa): I think Sir Henry Craik was a bachelor — he 
did not understand society. 

Shri Bhatt: I have taken this from the Debates of 1937 where it 
is given on page No. 2544 of Volume No 3. Hence, my submission is 
that we too should keep a provision of this nature in it. Look into 
the Baroda Act which all of us appreciate. Baroda is several years 
ahead of us, ask them now where they are at present. Ask them what 
facilities they enjoy and from what difficulties they suffer, and how 
they enforce their various laws. They might perhaps admit that the 
old days were by far better. I do not say all that with any special 
motive. I hold that so far as social laws are concerned Mysore is 
ahead of all other parts of India. And if I am not wrong — Mysore 
friends would excuse me — Sir Sayaji Rao Gaikwad was the first 
to introduce Educational and Health reforms long before Mysore 
and other stepped in. 

Dr. Ambedkar : He did a blunder : 

Shri Bhatt: You want to take us, the people of Rajasthan, on 
to progress. We find that we are a tardy people and go slow. Our 
speed is that of a camel which cannot go along with the speed 
of your aeroplane. So it is good to slow down the speed of your 
aeroplane. The Baroda Hindu Code also lays down : 

“This Act shall apply to all persons domiciled in the Baroda State. 

(a) who are Hindus by birth or by conversion to Hinduism or to 
whom any part of this Act is made applicable by this Act, to the 
extent to which it is so applicable. 

Explanation 1. The people to whom the Hindu law or any part thereof 
is applicable by custom and usage shall be deemed to be Hindus ” 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Which Code is this ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1063 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1063 

Shri Bhatt : The Baroda Hindu Code. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Monogamy Act. 

Shri Bhatt : Yes. It lays down : 

“The people to whom the Hindu law or any part thereof is applicable 
by custom and usage shall be deemed to be Hindus for the purposes of 
this Act in so far as the matters in respect of which the Hindu law or 
any part thereof is so applicable or concerned”. 

You have been saying that whomsoever would it apply to would be 
considered a Hindu whether he professes the Hindu religion or not. But 
I say all the people who live in India are Hindus. I do not say so from 
the cultural point of view alone. I am saying it from the English point 
of view as well. After all why are we called Indians or Hindustanis ? 
As a matter of fact the word ‘Hindu’ refers to the man who is born in 
a particular territory and certainly not to his religion. And because it 
refers to the man born in a particular area rather than to the Hindu 
faith, it means that it covers all the people who inhabit that land. See 
the following: 

“(b) who have not renounced following the Hindu Law shall, be deemed 
to be Hindus”. 

This is the thing and so I request the Hon. Minister to accept my 
amendment. Now I come to the portion which is not still covered. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor: Which of the amendments do you support 
specially ? 

Shri Bhatt: I support my amendment i.e. “Those who want to be 
governed”. This covers everything that I want. 

I would like to draw your attention to one thing more. Our Hon. 
Shri Gadgil and Pandit Kunzru too have dwelt upon this point. When 
Sarda Act, i.e. the Child Marriage Restraint Act was introduced in 1928, 
originally its title was the ‘Hindu Child Marriage’ Bill. But in 1929 
when the report of the Committee was received, some alterations were 
made in it and its name was changed to “Child Marriage Restraint 
Bill”. You know there were some Muslim members as well on that 
Committee. They opposed it. When it was discussed in the House in 
the year 1929 they again opposed it, but in spite of their opposition it 
was thought desirable to enforce it throughout the country as it was 
a good legislative measure. With the exception of Mr. Jinnah all the 
Muslim Members opposed its application to Muslims and said that their 
divines were opposed to it and as such it should not be applied to them. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1064 


1064 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

If I remember well there was a Christian member, Mr. Chatterji, 
of the House in those days. He too pointed out that it went against 
their religion and as such it should not be applied to them. There 
were speeches of this nature. But in spite of all that opposition the 
Government applied it to all sections of the population because it was, 
in fact, good measure. My submission is that if monogamy is really a 
good thing why don’t you impose this restraint on all sections of the 
population and why do you leave out some people from its purview. May 
be some Muslim friends are having two wives — there are very few such 
cases in Hindu society. Generally it has been seen that people from 
lower classes alone keep two wives but they keep them only to help 
them in their occupations. Broadly speaking, the majority of Hindus 
are monogamous either by nature or by circumstances. It is difficult 
to get even one wife, wherefrom can one get two ? At that time it was 
stated in the Select Committee Report that: 

“The object of the Bill, as introduced in the Legislature, was to impose 
restraint upon the solemnisation of child marriages and the method adopted 
was, broadly speaking, that of declaring all marriges of boys and girls 
below a certain age to be invalid.” 

I would like to draw your attention to the fact that the aim and 
object of the Sarda Act was ‘to declare the marriage to be invalid’. 
But afterwards it was altered. And why was it altered ? It was done 
because it would have been very strict. You have to keep this thing in 
view. I would speak about monogamy when I would come to it. After 
making alterations it was laid down : 

“The Bill has been circulated under the orders of the Government and 
has elicited a strong expression of feeling that it is objectionable both on 
religious and on legal grounds of interfere with the validity of a marriage 
which has been performed. 

In our opinion, these objections are at present insuperable and we 
have accordingly acted upon a suggestion which has been widely made 
that the Bill should effect its purpose of restraining child marriages not 
by declaring such marriages to be invalid but by imposing punishments 
upon those who participate in them.” 

You would see what a difference it has made. The things that were 
formerly contemplated to be rejected, were not rejected. Those marriages 
were not made invalid. But some punishments were imposed on them. 
Further it was laid down that: 

“The Bill, as introduced applied to Hindus, Jains, Sikhs, 
Brahmos, Arya Samajists and Buddhists and was a measure relating 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1065 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1065 

to the validity of marriage. As we propose to amend the Bill by making 
it a measure imposing criminal penalties on participants in a child 
marriage, it seems invidious that it should be restricted to those particular 
communities, since child marriages do occur, though not so frequently, 
in other communities. We propose, therefore, that the amended Bill 
should be general in its scope and apply to all classes and communities 
in British India.” 

This was a marked departure. They did it after fully appreciating 
the trend of the public mind and so the Hon. Minister of Law should 
also go ahead after taking into view the trend of the society. This is 
my only request. 

See what is laid down about the Indian Christians in the Christian 
Marriage Act. See what is laid down in the Parsi Act regarding the bona 
fides of the Parsees. This is a very limited definition. A Parsi is he who 
professes Zoroastrianism. There are several cults here in this country 
and people follow someone or the other. That is why I submit that all 
the people should be considered as ‘Hindus’. 

The Sarda Act has not been applied to Part B States so far. According 
to the amendment of 1950, the subject is in the Concurrent List and 
can be applied to any State. You can apply anything you like to those 
States as well. But in spite of that provision being there this Act has 
not been enforced in Part B States so far. 

Shri B. Das : I hope Dr. Ambedkar takes note of this. 

Dr. Ambedkar : All that would be cancelled. 

Shri Bhatt: So I was speaking to the Hon. Minister of Law about 
divorce. I respectfully want to submit that he should allow a law to 
continue so long as it does not go against the social customs. And for 
those persons who favour these reforms, provision for Civil Marriage is 
already there. 

Dr. Ambedkar : For them too the door should be closed. 

Shri Bhatt: Do not close the door for those for whom it is open, 
notwithstanding whether they come from the door or from the window. 
But allow the various customs to prevail in the various sections of the 
population, at least in those sections of the Hindu population who are 
backward in education and in other respects. Our Hon. Minister of Law 
has not made a tour to peep into the actual working of the Hindu society. 
Please have such a tour and contact the people, show them your books 
and convince them about what you have brought for them. A real thing 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1066 


1066 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

can never lose its reality, just as gold can never turn into a stone ; 
it can only become refined gold. So please allow gold to become more 
refined and let them have time to understand what divorce actually 
means. Do not give rise to a dispute here. Those who favour such 
reforms are at liberty to make use of the Civil Marriage Act, and have 
the facility of divorce under that Act. You ask how those people, who 
are not married under the Civil Marriage Act, can have the benefit of 
divorce. I give you a suggestion in order to find out a way for them. 
Allow them to get their marriages registered under the Civil Marriages 
Act so that they may also have the benefit of having divorce, if they so 
desire. In this way they can have a wider door open for the fulfilment 
of their wishes. 

Shri R. C. Upadhyaya : What do you suggest if the husband favours 
it and the wife does not ? 

Shri Bhatt: The wife listens to the words of her husband. She still 
considers her husband “God’ at home, notwithstanding the fact that 
she may be an educated one. But that does not mean that Hindus 
consider their wives as their serfs. She is the mistress of the house and 
a Devi. These are the words which are used for her. I do not believe 
that Hindu society is so degenerated as to consider its womenfolk as 
serfs. If anybody has any such impression, he should wash it off. I say 
even in those sects which are called backward, women are mistresses 
of their homes and their men do only what they direct them to do. 
In Rajasthan and other places there are several social customs which 
are included in the Shastra and that Shastra is known as the Doshi 
Shastra. People do every thing in the manner in which the old ladies 
advise them to do. If a pandit makes a mistake while performing a 
sacramental marriage ceremony, it is at once pointed out with the help 
of songs as to where he has committed mistake. If there would be any 
mistake in the Saptpadi etc. we at once come to know with the help of 
the songs as to where the mistake has actually occurred. In this way, 
all those customs go on with the help of the songs not be presumed 
that women are not honoured in Hindu society. 

A drunkard might be a good man, a great man or an educated man 
but in spite of all that he is a drunkard. It only intoxicates a man, 
what else can be the effect of the drink. Whether a drunkard is from 
a backward class or from a higher class he or she is nothing more 
than a silly person. 

Shri R. C. Upadhyaya : What should be done for them ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1067 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1067 

Shri Bhatt: Only the next day that intoxication would go by 
itself and everything would be all right. You do not know that that 
becomes their habit. All of us have a number of habits good and 
bad, and so far as in toxication is concerned I have come across a 
number of people who take two or three bottles of whisky at a time 
and still do not subject themselves to intoxication. The Hon. Doctor 
might be remembering that there used to be a number of persons 
in the Bombay Bar Council who could not argue their case in the 
courts unless they had taken one or two pegs. 

Mr. Chairman : May I know on which provision of clause 2 the 
hon. Member is speaking ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : We are discussing Evacuee Property Bill. 

Shri Bhatt: Sir, I should be excused, there has been a little 
digression. But I would like to remind you that some of my friends 
talked about it. What I was submitting was that nobody stated that 
you were only bringing any deterioration or improvement in the Bill 
by keeping or not keeping any provision of monogamy in it. What 
is the necessity of imposing legal restraints on it ? If you are bent 
upon imposing them we would have no objection, but then please 
impose it on all sections of the population of the country, because 
the Muslims too then would not feel about it. They too would agree 
that it is a good thing and that as such it should be applied to them 
as well. As Sarda Act has been applied to one and all, similarly its 
application too should be extended to all sections of the population. 
So far as divorce is concerned it is already prevalent in the Muslim 
community. Hence my request is that whatever legislation you like 
to make, it should be applied to one and all. Nobody should be 
excluded from its application, it should apply to Indians generally. 

I admit that you have come up to appreciate us and to accommodate 
our viewpoint. You have become so much accommodating now that you 
have realized the position. And now if you do not want to do anything, 
at least please do one thing. Take out the marriage and divorce 
clauses from the original Bill, pass them as a separate law and make 
it applicable to all the Indians. If you would do that everybody would 
be happy over it, would praise you and would say that you have really 
done a brave deed. All opposition would go automatically ; it would 
vanish and people would say that the Government have taken the right 
step which gives them the maximum satisfaction. Although that would 
not be complete satisfaction, yet that would be the maximum under the 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1068 

1068 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

present circumstances. So please adopt this course after taking into 
consideration the present day situation. When you would proceed to 
do it, you would come to know what more should it contain and what 
more improvements you ought to bring in it. ( Interruption ). Hence I 
request you to look towards them as well so that you may come to 
know where exactly the shoe pinches. The wearer knows where the 
shoe pinches. At that time you would come to know that the opposition 
is very strong. Several sister would come here, would entreat you and 
then you would come to know about the real position. Several other 
people too would come here and you would come to know the extent 
to which this measure would be opposed. But I say do not mind the 
opposition from whatever quarter it may come. Wait for sometime and 
then as the Sarda Act was passed by the Government without caring 
for any opposition, similarly pass a law which may apply to one and 
all. There is no question of time in it. Prepare a new draft Bill and 
when we meet in February next, put it before the House. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : It would be the month of Phagun. I 
think that would be the opportune time. 

Shri Bhatt: Yes, it would be the month of Phagun. But whatever 
month it may be I most humbly put forth my suggestion. I do not 
say all this simply by way of a joke. It would certainly benefit the 
whole of India. Why do you benefit a few selected Hindus only, benefit 
the whole nation. Send your invitation to all and make this law a 
perfect one. 

With these words, Sir, I request the Hon. Minister to think over my 
suggestions. Last of all I appeal to you that this is not the opportune 
time to go ahead with this legislation. Stop there, it would bring no 
harm to the country, it would only bring cheers to the Government. 
Sir, I have certainly taken much of your time, but I did not make 
an effort to prolong my speech in any way. I would request the 
Hon. Minister who is the representative of the Government here, to 
consider our humble but plain request so that it might bring glory 
to our Government. 

*Sardar B. S. Man : Sir, I thank you very much for calling me to 
explain my position. 

I have moved an amendment that the Sikhs be absolved from the 
operation of this Bill and that the Sikh community be not brought into 
the (315 PSD) orbit of this Bill. I would have very much liked to have 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II. 18th September 1951, pp. 2835-40. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1069 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1069 

moved an amendment not embracing simply our community in terms 
of Sikhs, or Hindus or Muslims ; but looking at the main clause as 
it has been framed, I was forced to use this word. I would have very 
much preferred to have used a territorial term saying that the Punjabis 
be absolved, or certain agricultural classes be absolved. But, since 
the framers of the Bill themselves have used the word Hindu, Jain, 
Buddhist and Sikh, I have moved an amendment in these terms. In 
fact, I have an amendment to clause 1 that the operation of the Bill 
be not extended to Punjab and P.E.P.S.U. I base my arguments not 
on narrow communal or religious grounds. I shall come to that later. 
I do not minimise the fact that this attempt to bring the Sikhs under 
the domain of Hindu Law will savour of bad political communial taste. 

The other day, the learned Doctor cited a case to show that the 
Sikhs have all along been governed by the Hindu Law. With all 
apologies to him, I may point out that the law that he has cited was 
confined to the non-agriculturist properties. The Sikhs mainly comprise 
agriculturists. In fact the agriculturist Sikhs comprise 95 per cent, of 
the Sikh community. When you have to discern clearly and generalise in 
this way as to what law applies to them, you have not got to see that 
commercial classes of the Sikhs, the khatri Sikhs or other Sikhs who are 
resident in the cities, but you have got to look to the main community, 
the agriculturist Sikhs and see what their laws is. And I can cite not 

one, but innurable cases. I can cite case after case to prove 

1 P.M. 

that in the Punjab the agricultural Sikh, along with other 
agricultural classes were all along governed by a secular law — and here 
incidentally it was an advance far ahead of what is proposed in this 
Hindu Code. So, I say we are there absolutely governed by a secular 
law. There we have got a uniform law for the agriculthral population 
who form the bulk of the population. We should not look at the law 
governing the microscopic minority of the people. We have to look at 
the law that prevails among the main bulk of the population, the main 
bulk which in this case forms about 95 per cent, of the population there. 
There, as I have said, we have an advanced law, that whether he be a 
Muslim or a Hindu or a Sikh, we are governed so far as succession to 
property is concerned, by one common law, and that is the customary 
law. But here you are bringing forward this Hindu Code and so I confront 
you with the statement that we have got one common, uniform law 
which cuts across all communities and all narrow communalism in the 
Punjab. But by this measure you are trying to introduce for the first 
time communalism in the Punjab. {Interruption) . Yes. The customs are 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1070 


1070 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

there and they are due to the long usages which have been recognised. 
Various attempts have been made to over-ride customs ; but all this is 
is bad and it wiill be a bad policy and quite definitely an ill-advised 
policy, to promulgate laws from the top and then within these fifteen days 
change the entire structure of society there which has come through for 
a very long time and which has imbibed in itself the wisdom of the ages 
and the spirit of the time. I am mot saying that because a particular 
law has been laid down by a particular old Brahmin and so it cannot 
be touched or changed. I am not basing my argument upon that sort 
of sanctity. I only say that the custom has come down to us and it has 
developed, due to the lack of rigidity it has imbibed into itself certain 
practical usages, usages very useful to the genius of the people there. I 
will come to this part later on. Here I only refer to it to say that custom 
over-rides the written text. The custom in the Punjab has been there 
and is still the law there. 

Apart from that, I shall prove also that my customs are far more 
advanced than this retrograde step that is now being proposed. They 
are much more advanced in many respects. 

I ask that the Sikhs be absolved from this Bill, for this reason 
also. It will surprise hon. Members, as it has surprised me, that all 
along, since the introduction of the Hindu Code Bill in this House by 
Mr. Mandal — in fact though Dr. Ambedkar is trying to improve upon that 
Bill, nevertheless he is carrying Mandal’s baby — since the introduction 
of the Bill up to now, there has not been a single Sikh Member on the 
Select Committee. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Giani Gurmukh Singh ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : No. No Sikh opinion has ever been consulted 
on this vital question. Nor has there been appreciable agitation among 
the Sikhs because we were told that the agricultural property will 
be an exception under this Hindu Code Bill and this led to a sort of 
indifference among the Sikh community towards this Bill, 95 per cent, 
of the population thought that this Hindu Code Bill was not going to 
touch them in a vital way. 

Shri A. C. Shukla : Have the Sikhs passed any resolution against 
the Code in any of their conferences ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : I can speak for the Sikhs much better than the 
hon. Member. There are a few ladies here and on such a vital matter 
as this they are consulted and listened to and their advice is accepted. 
But in this House we are seven Members of the Sikh community and 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1071 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1071 

I challenge the hon. Member to produce a single Member of the Sikh 
community who is in favour of this Bill completely and totally ? 

Shri A. C. Shukla : What about those outside the House ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : Again and again on the floor of this House, 
speaker after speaker has pleaded, let us not proceed with the majority 
of the Members here. Let us conduct a referendum of the people 
outside. If that is what you want, let it be referred to a referendum 
of the Sikh community. Till then it should not be passed with the 
majority of the Hindu Mebers here. I am not a Hindu. I have never 
followed the Hindu Law. I am constrained to say that this law is a 
conversion law for the Sikhs. You are bringing in totally obnoxious 
principles, certain novel innovations which have never been followed 
and which in the villages have never been heard of and you are 
forcing down our throats something alien to us. Even the ladies 
here, though few, are consulted and listened to and we the seven 
Members are unanimous about Sikh opinion that certain provisions 
which are retrograde and obnoxious should not be forced on us. My 
friend asks whether they have passed any resolution to that effect. 
My grievance is that Sikh opinion has not been consulted. The very 
fact that Dr. Ambedkar has not received the memoranda of the Sikh 
societies and S.G.P.C, which is an authentic body to speak on behalf 
of the Sikh community so far as their personal law is concerned as 
also their religious precepts shows that the Sikh community has not 
been consulted 

Sardar Hukam Singh (Punjab): Resolutions have also been passed 
in certain Sikh conferences against this Code. 

Sardar B. S. Man : My hon. friend Sardar Hukam Singh 
enlightens me that there have been resolutions. At the time of the 
original introduction of the Bill or at the time of the formation 
of the Select Committee no Sikh Member was either consulted 
or represented on the Committee. Dr. Ambedkar says that Gyani 
Gurmukh Singh Musafir was there. Would be then listen to his 
advice, if he was there ? If there had been a single Member of the 
Sikh community would he give due weight to his opinion ? He was 
not a member of the Select Committee then but when the House 
adjourned and later when Dr. Ambedkar agreed to consult more 
pandits and he had a sort of informal conference, incidentally then 
Sardar Gurmukh Singh Musafir was asked to give his opinion. If 
as he says that he consulted Sikh opinion in the person of Sardar 
Gurmukh Singh Musafir then please listen to his advice so far as 
the Sikh community is concerned. But the Government did not think 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1072 


1072 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

it proper to include Sikh Members in the Select Committee and we 
of the Sikh community were never really agitated because till this 
day we were led to believe that agricultural property would not be 
touched and will be made an exception. Suddenly when this Bill is 
introduced we find that in his wisdom he has brought even agricultural 
property within the purview of this Bill. We were indifferent in the 
original instance because of the exemption of agricultural property 
and we never really applied ourselves to the provisions of the 
Bill. Now this Bill has suddenly emerged : it is a hotchpotch, it is 
retrograde in many respects and an advance in some other respects, 
it is a heterogenous combination and it is thrown at our face asking 
us to accept it. I frankly admit that I for one fail to comprehend 
its provisions and much less will the illiterate person or peasant 
in the villages. Much less so an illiterate person, a peasant in the 
field, because the peasant was told, “do not be worried because it is 
not going to touch you”. My grievance is that Sikh opinion was not 
consulted to any apreciable degree. And now when you pass this Bill 
with the help of the Hindu majority here, it will leave a very bad 
taste and memory in the minds of the Sikhs that in spite of their 
unanimous opposition to the Bill, in spite of the fact that they were 
led to believe that most of the provisions of the Bill will not apply 
to them suddenly, at the fag end of the session it was passed much 
against the will of the community. 

An Hon. Member : Then let your Members show the opposition. 

Sardar B. S. Man : Yes. My esteemed friend, Sardar Hukam singh 
who can speak on behalf of the Sikhs in a much better capacity 
than myself has shown his opposition. After all, it is not a political 
matter that you may not accept his advice. It is not such a matter 
in which because he sits in opposition his opinion may be declined. 
On matters of personal law, on matters of religious precepts, on 
matters of adoption of Hindu communal law, you must accept 
the opinion of the representatives here ; and we are unanimously 
opposed to it. And if in spite of our opposition you proceed and 
make the provisions applicable, then it will be a strange thing — it 
will go down as something autocratic, something savouring of the 
communal. It so happens that we are only seven Sikh Members 
here. But we want that so far as religious matters are concered, 
so far as personal law is concerned, due weight should be given 
irrespective of the fact that a section may be numerically very much 
weaker. You have already made exceptions. I am not arguing on 
these lines because you have made exceptions. Because a Muslim is 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1073 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1073 

allowed to marry four wives, I do not say that I should be allowed to marry 
four times. The fact is that you have made exceptions. Why ? Because 
you found that the law of the Muslims, the law of the Christains, so far 
as their personal law was concerned, was absolutely different. And since 
it was completely different and in many respects diametrically opposed 
to the Hindu Code, therefore you made an exception so that it may not 
be forced down their throat. That way you gave a latitude and thus you 
accepted the principle that irrespective of the fact that the Hindus may 
be in majority here they will not force a law of theirs, so far as their 
personal usage, religious precepts, etc. are concerned, down the throat 
of any minority. If you have accepted this because the Muslim Law and 
the Christain Law and even the Parsi Law is fundamentally different, 
then I may be permitted to prove on the floor of this House — on any 
given subject that you are trying to legislate, for example, marriage 
succession or divorce — that the Sikh Law is entirely different. Then I 
claim the exception which you have extended to the Muslims. Because 
the Muslims proved that they were governed by an entirely different set 
of laws they were given an exception. And if I prove here that I am also 
governed, in every single item which you are trying to legislate here, by 
a different law, and that my law is fundamentally different from yours, 
then I claim the same concession which has been extended to Parsis, 
Muslims and Charistains should be extended to me also. 

Mr. Chairman : The Hon. Member may continue tomorrow. 

The House then adjourned till Half Past Eight of the Clock on 
Wednesday, the 19th September, 1951. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1074 


1074 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

*HINDU CODE — contd. 


[9-30 a.m.] 

Clause 2. — (Application of Code) — contd. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Before the discussion starts I might inform the 
House that this is the sixth day of the debate on clause 2. Practically 
all shades of opinion have been covered. (Interruption). It is not as if 
every hon. Member should be allowed to speak. The matter has been 
sufficiently placed before the House both for and against the Bill as 
a whole and also particular clauses. We must be able to see the end 
of the discussion so far as clause 2 is concerned. I would request hon. 
Members not to occupy the whole time but give opportunities to other 
hon. Members so that we might close the debate on the clause today, 
hon. Members will try to be brief and short, as all the points have been 
elaborately discussed already. 

f Sardar B. S. Man (Punjab): When the House adjourned yesterday 
I was advocating that the Sikhs be absolved from the operation of the 
Bill and I was basing my arguments on two counts. One was that we 
in the Punjab are predominantly agriculturists, who form 95 per cent, 
of the population and the Sikh community forms a predominent part 
among the agriculturists. We in company with other fellow agriculturists, 
both Hindus and Muslims, are governed not by a Brahmanical rule of 
law, but by an entirely secular set of laws. We are governed by customs, 
secular customs and they are different fundamentally from the proposed 
provisions of the Bill. Secondly, I said that Sikh opinion on this vital 
matter has not been consulted. I was dealing with the second point. 

I have now looked into the matter and gone into the entire body 
of opinion circulated to us in the report of the Hindu Law Committee 
and I find to my dismay that not one authentic opinion on behalf of 
the Sikh community has agreed to this Bill. (An hon. Member. How 
authentic ?) There is an interruption asking how it is authentic. Perhaps 
many hon. Members in this House may not be aware that we have a 
statutory body for the Sikhs set up by law which votes according to the 
law made by the Government of India. There are 151 members who 
represent the entire community for the management of the gurdwaras 
and the administration of their religious laws. This body is known as 
the Shiromani Gurdwara Prabandhak Committee. Incidentally it may 
be taken in this House that this body is dominated by certain very very 

* P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 19th September 1951, pp. 2841-98. 
f Ibid.., 19th September 1951, pp. 2841-48. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1075 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1075 

aggressive or communal Sikhs but it will be a surprise to the House 
to know that at present its president is no less than Sardar Nagoke, a 
staunch Congressman. The body is entirely dominated by Congressites. 
This body which is not aggressively communal and which has been set 
up by statutory law has expressed its emphatic opinion against the Bill. 
Nothing can be more representative than the opinion of the S.G.P.C., 
let alone the numerous conferences and gatherings of Sikhs which have 
expressed their opinion against it. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): Where ? 

Sardar B. S. Man: Outside the House, I ask the Government to take 
one position. Either pass this Bill because you are sure that the majority 
of the Members here, who are representatives of their communities, want 
it or you think that the representatives of a particular community are so 
outmoded that they do not represent the real opinion outside the House, 
which wants the Bill. Stand on any of these two positions either inside 
or outside the House. We are six members here representing the Sikh 
community. (An hon. Member: You said seven yesterday.) The senvth is 
from U.P. Even if you are prepared to base your position upon his opinion 
I am prepared to risk it, though I have not consulted him because I know 
very well the opinion of the agriculturists and he is one of them. We 
six Members here represent P.E.P.S.U. and the Punjab. You cannot say 
that we all belong to the same party. Here are Ministerialists, there is 
an independent like Sardar Sochet Singh, people who are diametrically 
opposed to Congress party like Sardar Hukam Singh, who is an Akali 
leader and there is the Congressman Sardar Gurmukh Singh Musafir. I 
ask the Government on whose opinion you have derived the impression 
that the Sikhs want the Bill. I challenge that we are unanimously 
opposed to it. Do not force it on us just as you have not forced it down 
the throats of Christains. The Christians numerically are almost the 
same number as we in the Punjab. You have made an exception of the 
Christains but you are not prepared to make an exception of the Sikhs, 
As representatives in this House we do not want it. If you say that people 
outside want it, I ask the Law Minister and the Minister of State Mr. 
Tyagi, who is now a Government supporter, to produce a single opinion 
to show that we want it. ( Interruptions ) 

The Minister of State for Finance (Shri Tyagi): Indicated dissent. 

Sardar B. S. Man : I am sorry I reffered to Mr. Tyagi, as I thought 
that the interruption came from him, since I was opposing the Government 
and he was supporting it now. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1076 


1076 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Tyagi: I am a widower and I have no interest either in 
marriage or divorce. 

The Minister of States, Transport and Railways (Shri 
Gopalaswami) : Who knows ? You may yet improve ! 

Sardar B. S. Man : Many who are widowers here want the divorce 
system to be there because they hope to find their deliverance through 
it. However, Mr. Tyagi is an exception. In spite of the fact that he 
is a widower he is against divorce, rather an unusual phenomenon. 

Sardar Sochet Singh (P.E.P.S.U.): He may be interested in divorce 
in his neighbour’s house. 

Sardar B. S. Man : So, as I said, we were not consulted. Although, 
political opinions are very divergent on the Sikh community, the present 
Government is not listening either to the Congress Sikh, the Akali 
Sikh or the independent Sikh, nor even the Ministerialist Sikh. It is 
surprising how the Government has come to the wonderful conclusion 
that the Sikh opinion has been sufficiently agitated and consulted. 
After my speech yesterday, certain friends came to me and told me 
“Mr. Man, it is all right. We admit that your customs are different 
and that you were not consulted sufficiently. But why can we not 
legislate for you ? Because all along you have been a Hindu and you 
were governed by Hindu law,” I shall come to that point of whether 
we have ever been governed by Hindu law, but as to the point whether 
we are Hindus, I should not like to repeat the argument here but I 
would like to mention something in that connection. I came across a 
pamphlet yesterday wherein it is said that if you go to a village and 
tell a Sikh, “You are a Hindu”, the answer will be not in words but 
a slap on your face. I will not — I dare not — use that argument here. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab): How are the Sikh 
agriculturists differently placed from the Hindu agriculturists of 
Punjab ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : I would have much liked to argue, and in 
fact I am actually basing all my arguments on that fact, that as an 
agriculturist I am in the company of Hindu agriculturists and the 
Musalman agriculturists. And my lawyer friend knows perfectly well 
that the Sikh agriculturist, along with the Hindu agriculturist and the 
Muslim agriculturist, is governed by a customary set of laws applicable 
uniformly to all. If I am using the word Sikh, it is due to the bane of this 
Bill. I would have liked to argue that the agriculturists of the Punjab 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1077 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1077 

be absolved, but what shall I do when the Bill — in that respect a 
backward Bill, a communal Bill — legislates for Hindus, Sikhs, Jains 
etc. and talks in terms of communal groups and not in terms of secular 
groups ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Is it not a fact that the Hindu 
non-agriculturists living in the villages follow the same customs as 
the Hindu agriculturists ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : Yes. That is the beauty of our entire law 
in the Punjab. It is an advancement on other parts that we in the 
Punjab are governed by village communities and not by religious law. 
We are governed by land and we revolve round land laws, secular 
laws. Let me give a quotation to meet this interruption. I will quote 
from Rattigan’s Digest. My whole point is that, so far as this law is 
concerned in its application to Punjab, it is not reformative : it is not 
progressive because it is too conservative, because it is too orthodox ; 
it is retrograde because it is communal — our law in the Punjab has 
gone much farther at least so far as secularism is concerned. In our 
village communities we have been governed by the same set and same 
pattern of laws ; Hindus, Muslims and Sikhs, agriculturists and non- 
agriculturists, were attached to the land all these ages ; they imbibed 
the wisdom of the ages and the spirit of the times and throughout 
they were governed by one set of laws. But Dr. Ambedkar comes out 
one fine morning with this Hindu Code Bill — perhaps he is jealous of 
us — and says, “I am going to cut across you and split you into two 
communal groups”. Either you be a Hindu or you be a Mussalman ! 
That is the effect of it. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal): Rather, “give up all 
religions”! 

Sardar B. S. Man : Now what does Rattigan’s Digest say in this 
matter ? It says : 

“It had long been felt by those best acquired with the habits and 
customs of the rural population that neither the Shara nor the Shastras 
really exercised any direct influence among them.” 

Then: 

“The Hindu law extravagantly exalts the Brahman; it gives sacerdotal 
reasons for secular rules. In the Punjab, Hindus and Mussalmans 
converted from Hinduism may fear or feed the Brahman; but in 
civil affairs Punjab Customary Law ranks him with other men. It is 
essentially unsacerdotal, unsacramental, secular.” 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1078 


1078 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is not the Shariat now applicable to the Punjab ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : I am splitting up the Punjab population into two 
distinct groups : one group comprises 95 per cent, of the population and 
the other remaining five per cent. The 95 per cent., and in fact even 
more, live in the villages and is attached to the land 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Was not Shariat passed in undivided India ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : I shall come to the Punjab laws. There the custom 
is the primary rule of decision to the exclusion of Shariat as well as 
the Hindu Law, 

Dr. Ambedkar : That has been overruled by the Shariat law. 

Sardar B. S. Man : Shariat will fill in the gap when there is no 
customary law prevalent. It is quite distinct. I must refer to that later 
since I do not want my argument interrupted now. We have legislation — 
the Punjab Laws Act of 1872, clause 5 — where it is distinctly laid down 
that in Punjab the first rule of decision will be the customary law and 
where there is no custom and a gap arises only then the Hindu law or 
the Shariat law will come in. 

Shri R. C. Upadhyaya (Rajasthan) : Are the customs reduced to 
writing ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : Not only, reduced to writing but compiled, listened 
to and decided — not for ten or fifteen years but for ages. 

An Hon. Member : Is not your custom the same as Hindu custom ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : What innocence ! If I were to prove to my friend 
here that my custom is entirely and fundamentally different from Hindu 
law, will he be prepared to make an exception ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : If a custom is reasonable. 
Dr. Ambedkar is bound to accept it ( Interruption ). 

Sardar B. S. Man : The interruptions are many. Interrupter says 
that if I convince him he is bound to accept it. I do not know whether I 
can convince a person who is not willing to be convinced : Dr. Ambedkar 
says, even if he is convinced he will not accept it. 

Now, let me give a quotation from Mayne’s Hindu Law ; it has held 
the field for a fairly long time and is a fairly authoritative commentary. 
It says: 

“As regards the Village Communities, the Punjab and the 

adjoining districts are the region in which alone they flourish in 

their primitive rigour. This is the tract which the Aryans must have 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1079 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1079 

first traversed on entering India. Yet it seems to have been there that 

Brahmanism most completely failed to take root and the religious 

element has never entered into their secular law: ” 

If I have enjoyed emancipation from Manu for so long a time, 
will it not be a tyranny of the times if I have to submit now to a 
modern Manu ? If I have not been governed by Brahmanical rule 
and I have had secular law for a long time in Punjab, if I have 
not accepted Manu’s religion, then let me assure the House that 
Punjab is not going to accept Ambedkarian religion henceforward, 
( interruption ). Let me give credit to Manu that at least he was 
original in many respects, but my modern Manu — oh, what a fall 
has he had ! He is neither original nor progressive. ( Interruption ). 
You ask who is the modern Manu ? Well, I need not say. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am not a modern Manu. 

Sardar B. S. Man : In Punjab we do not recognise communal 
groupst and the application of this law will, for the first time 
introduce the communal element there. I shall read to you from 
Mayne’s Hindu Law, 9th Edition, Page 48, where it is said: 

“The special interest of Punjab Customs arises from the fact that 
Brahmanism seems never to have succeeded in the Punjab. Accordingly, 
when we find a particular usage common to the Punjab and to Sanskrit 
law, we may infer that there is nothing necessarily Brahmanical in 
its origin. The Brahmans are not, in the Punjab, the depositaries of 
Customary law. To ascertain it, we must go to the Jirga, or Tribal 
Council, if there be one, or to the elders of the tribe. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari (Assam): I am sorry to interrupt, but 
let us come straight to the point. Does the Hon. Member want 
monogamy or not ? That is the question. 

Shri Tyagi: Why beat about the bush ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : A false sense of security is being created in 
the House through the Press that Government want to proceed with 
only marriage and divorce. Has Dr. Ambedkar declared here difinitely 
that he is leaving out the other portions and he is only concerned 
with marriage and divorce ? I am discussing the applicability of this 
Code in its entirety. I proceed on the assumption that the other 
portions are not going to be dropped. I caution my friends. Once 
Government lull you into a sense of indifference and false feeling 
of security, they will proceed with the other portions. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1080 


1080 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari: Please answer my question. According to the 
customary law monogamy is allowed in Punjab. Are you in favour of 
continuing the monogamy law ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : I shall discuss that threadbare, law by law. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : We are not going to take up other matters. 
I think, it was made suficiently clear by the Hon. the Prime Minister 
who stated that they would proceed only with marriage and divorce. If 
this is accepted, I hope the hon. Member will resume his seat. 

Sardar Hukam Singh (Punjab): If this clause is accepted at this 
stage, would it be again taken into consideration when the other Chapters 
come up ? Once it is made applicable, certainly the whole thing has to 
be thrashed out at this stage. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: If the Bill is confined to marriage and divorce 
and the other parts are brought in by a separate Bill, does the Hon. 
Member think that this clause will apply to everyone ? 

Shrimati Durgabai (Madras): What is the basis for the Hon. Member’s 
statement that the most important Chapters relating to inheritance will 
be dropped ? What is the source of his information ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : The hon. lady Member comes to my rescue for 
the first time. It is exactly because the other portions have not been 
dropped, I say that I am perfectly entitled to discuss the whole body of it. 

Shri Bharati (Madras): The Prime Minister and the Law Minister have 
already stated that due to factors of time etc. it is more than unlikely 
that the other Chapters would be taken up. Although it may not be a 
categorical assurance, for all practical purposes we may take it as the 
official decision. If we take the practical aspects of the matter, in all 
probability, I may even say 99 per cent, the other Chapters would not 
be taken up during the current session. It is just possible that we may 
take them up during February or March next, but during the current 
session it is absolutely impossible to take up other Chapters. It will be 
great fortune if we finish Chapter II. Therefore, I would request other 
members to co-operate. At least, let us pass this portion. I think it will 
be in the interests of the discussion if Dr. Ambedkar makes some kind 
of statement and gives, if not a categorical assurance at least some 
indication, that only the provisions relating to marriage and divorce 
would be passed during the current session. 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava (Ajmer): Has the hon. Member been briefed 
by the Government of India to take up this position ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1081 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1081 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Hon. Members are entitled to speak on both 
sides. 

Dr. Deshmukh (Madhya Pradesh): After all, clause 2 does not make 
any distinction between different portions of the Code as it has been 
placed before us. If my hon. friend does not say at the present stage 
all that he wants to say with respect to the other Chapters, he will be 
precluded from saying them later, because clause 2 is of general application 
to the whole Code and does not refer merely to marriage and divorce. 
Once clause 2 is accepted, it will apply to the whole Code and unless 
we have an amendment saying that it applies to marriage and divorce 
only — and no such amendment is before us from Government — I think 
the hon. Member cannot be stopped from bringing in other Chapters. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh): Even if clause 2 is passed in 
this form or an amended from, it will not preclude any one from saying 
at any subsequent stage that any particular portion or Chapter shall 
not be applicable to this section of the community or that. Take for 
instance the question of succession and inheritance. When that Chapter 
is taken up, it will certainly be open to us to add a clause to the effect 
that this part of the Code shall not be applicable to Sikhs or this or 
that community. The passing of clause 2 would leave the door open to 
discuss the matter later on and it may be advisable for all of us, if we 
are agreed on the marriage and divorce laws subject to such amendments 
as may be acceptable, to proceed with the Bill. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am in a fix. I thought I would be able to 
ask hon. Members to conclude the debate on this matter having regard 
to the statement by the Hon. the Prime Minister that the Chapter on 
marriage and divorce only will be taken up. He said so particularly. 
Now, if clause 2 is to apply to all the other Chapters I do not know 
how I can ask the hon. Members not to refer to them. That is my fear. 
I would like elucidation from the Hon. the Law Minister. Otherwise the 
scope will become wider and it would not be reasonable for me to say 
that the debate shall be concluded so early. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The Hon. the Prime Minister stated the other day 
that the House will rise on the 6th. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : That is only provisional. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Whatever it may be, it is there. I think I can say 
without giving away the position of the Government that it is quite 
clear that it would not be possible to proceed in this session beyond the 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1082 


1082 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Chapter dealing with marriage and divorce. When we reach the end 
of that Chapter. I propose to move certain amendments to these two 
parts in order to make them self-contained and to attach to them 
certain Schedules which go with marriage and divorce. I think the 
House may well take it that that is the intention of Government so 
far as the present session is concerned. When, for instance, the other 
parts are taken up, no doubt any Law Minister who would be then 
piloting the Bill and the Draftsmen would see to it that those parts 
were also self contained and the same definition and rules as regards 
applicability will have to be repeated in the other parts when those 
parts are placed before the House. Obviously, the clauses dealing 
with applicability when they will be confined to this part would by 
no stretch of imagination be extended to the other parts unless they 
are repeated there. I think that any lawyer Member of this House 
should be able to understand that that would be the position, so that 
when the other parts come to be discussed it would be open to the 
House to see whether the same definition which is given now as to 
the territorial applicability of this part or the social applicability of 
this part should be the same as will be enacted so far as this part is 
concerned. It will be open to the House and also for the Government 
to see to it whether those parts should be made applicable universally 
in all parts of India, or whether they should be applicable to all 
communities, or whether any exception might be made. That is a 
matter which I think should be left to the future Government, the 
future Law Minister and the future Parliament. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray (West Bengal): On a point of order, Sir, 
Clause 2 has been under discussion for three days in the 
previous session and three days now six days in all. Almost 
all the speeches on clause 2 have gone into the merits of the provisions 
of the whole Bill. I want to ask whether once the consideration stage 
is over, is it open on a discussion of a clause, to go into every detail 
of the Bill as it has been done during the debate on clause 2 ? 

Shrimati Durgabai: May I seek a clarification. In the light of 
what the hon. the Law Minister has stated and also in the light of the 
fact that this House attaches considerable importance — the greatest 
importance — to the clauses relating to inheritence, because they are 
based on the principle of equality, is it the intention of Government 
to bring a separate Bill relating to those clauses in the next session 
of Parliament, if not during this session of Parliament ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1083 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1083 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am afraid that is entirely outside my jurisdiction. 
It is a matter which I should leave to the Prime Minister to answer. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta (Delhi): In view of the statement that 
has been made by the Hon. the Law Minister, may I know whether 
it is also the intention of Government to change the title of the Bill, 
because it is no longer a Code ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: When I reach clause 55, I shall move all the 
necessary amendments to make this an independent Bill and take 
it out of the Code. 

The Prime Minister and Minister of External Affairs (Shri 
Jawaharlal Nehru): If I have gathered purport of the hon. Member’s 
question, it was whether other parts of the Bill will be introduced 
in this session or in a subsequent session. So far as Government are 
concerned, we have often stated that we stand by the whole Bill. Our 
difficulty has been the difficulty of time, and we decided to proceed 
with Part II in this session and to pass it. That did not mean that 
we were giving up any other part and we would very much like to 
have the other parts passed too. But practically speaking, there is 
no chance of our doing that in the present session. Whenever we can 
avail of an opportunity we should like to take up the other parts. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Hon. the Prime Minister was not here 
when this point was raised. When Sardar Man was on his legs, he 
was referring to the other parts of the Bill inasmuch as they will 
be applicable to the Sikhs. At that stage, a point was raised as to 
whether the Hon. the Prime Minister has not already stated that 
this measure will now be confined to marriage and divorce and as 
such discussion should be confined to those two subjects. Having 
regard to the number of days that have been spent on this clause, 
I wanted to conclude the discussion on this today. The Hon. the 
Law Minister then said that it was intended to confine this Bill 
only to marriage and divorce and suitable amendments would be 
moved even with respect to the title. In regard to the other parts 
of the Bill it was said that a fresh Bill would be introduced which 
would also cover the applicability of this Bill to the territories or 
communities. A further question was asked as to when that Bill 
would be introduced, to which the Hon. the Law Minister replied 
that the Prime Minister alone must answer that question. That is 
why I was a little doubtful if the Prime Minister has been apprised 
of the discussion that took place here. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1084 


1084 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: I perhaps forgot to say that after clause 55 is 
reached, I shall not only introduce suitable amendments with the object 
of making that particular part self-contained, but I shall also move a 
motion that this Bill, so to say as amended, be passed independently 
of the other parts. 

With regard to the other question, I have looked into the Rules of 
Procedure. There will be two courses open. One course that will be open 
to me would be to move that the other clauses be put and negatived, 
so that Government will be free to bring them together in a separate 
code or separate part or separate Bill and move them whenever they 
want. The other course permissible — subject to your ruling — under the 
Rules of Procedure would be to let those parts stand. I find from the 
rules that there is nothing to prevent this Parliament from taking 
out a particular part or a particular portion from a whole Bill that 
has been before it and to treat it as an independent Bill and pass 
it. That is a matter which I am prepared to leave to you and to the 
House. Our present intention is to stop with clause 55 and certain 
relevant Schedules. I think that makes the position clear. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru : My hon. colleague has made the position 
quite clear. I entirely agree with him. We are for the present going 
to confine ourselves to Part II and complete it as a whole, apart from 
the rest. Then it depends on various possibilities, as to how best to 
deal with the rest of the Bill. But this ought to be kept separate. 

May I also qualify, or amend, a statement which I made about 
the length of this session. I said that we would like it to end on the 
6th October. As I see the debate proceeding, there is no chance of 
its ending on the 6th October. So, it will have to go on till we finish 
important work. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : May I seek a clarification ? The Hon. 
the Law Minister has made it quite clear that this will be a self- 
contained Bill dealing with monogamy, marriage and divorce. If that 
is so and the subsequent Bills will also be self-contained Bills, then 
the question of Hindu Code as such does not arise. Therefore, there 
will be different Bills and codification will have to follow later on, if 
necessary. Therefore we are not proceeding with the Bill as it is. We 
are only proceeding with the different heads of the Bill and at the 
moment we are only concerned with these three things. 

Shri Ramalingam Chettiar (Madras) : There are several 
provinces which have already got laws on monogamy and divorce. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1085 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1085 

Probably they are better, though the provisions that we are going to 
agree here is a compromise. We are having this compromise simply 
because we are going to have a Code. In case the present law is going 
to be confined to marriage and divorce, why not leave those laws which 
are passed by the different provinces alone and leave it to the people of 
those provinces to choose. This is an important issue which you have 
to consider. 

Pandit Malaviya (Uttar Pradesh): May I suggest to the Hon. the 
Law Minister whether it will not help if he did that at this stage rather 
than wait till the end ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not see any reason for doubting the motives of 
Government. I have said, and we propose to stand by what we have said. 

Pandit Malaviya : I am surprised that he should think that there is 
any doubt of his motives in what I said. I asked, will it not help if he 
did it at this stage, because if that is the thing which we are considering, 
it might become a slightly different situation for some of us. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Take it that it will be so. 

Pandit Malaviya: When we are in Parliament legislating, it is difficult 
to take things unless they are done. I simply asked, will it therefore not 
help if it is done now. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Hon. the Law Minister has made the 
intention of the Government clear. My only difficulty is this — I am not 
asking him to do it immediately — but when once we pass clause 2 and 
take up clause 55 I have got a doubt technically as to whether we can 
modify clause 2 then, at that stage. 

Dr. Ambedkar: At the time when you put this clause 2, I want to 
make a reservation that I reserve to myself the necessary liberty of 
making certain consequential amendments to clause 2. 

Some Hon. Members : No, no. How can it be ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: That is perfectly possible. 

Pandit Malaviya : That is authoritarian and not parliamentary ! 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: There is nothing unparliamentary. The 
Hon. the Law Minister has been extremely reasonable. There is 
no good losing one’s reason or making recriminations. It does not 
contribute to the coolness of the atmosphere that must prevail here. 
I understand the Law Minister. He has no mental reservations. He 
wanted to bring it by way of amendment to clause 55. Then I thought 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1086 


1086 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

within myself that at that stage it may be a bit too late. He has suggested 
an alternative that on clause 2 he will make a reservation to move the 
necessary consequential amendments. Even there I have a difficulty. I 
shall no doubt conclude the debate on this clause with that background 
that this clause, that is clause 2, will apply only to marriage and divorce. 
But I shall withhold putting it to the House. I shall conclude the entire 
debate and take it over after the Chapter is concluded. Now, in view of 
what has been said, hon. Members must be prepared to conclude the 
debate today. 

Sardar B. S. Man : He need not dilate upon the other matters. 

Shrimati Durgabai: Now that one hon. Member has stated that 
certain State Legislatures have passed monogamy Acts, may I point out 
that only three States — Madras, Bombay and Baroda — have passed such 
Acts. In view of the fact that there is a lot of confusion being resulted 
on account of all the State Legislatures not passing the laws and on 
account of differring High Court judgments, it is highly necessary that 
there should be a Central law on monogamy and divorce so that it will 
be applicable to all States whether they wish it or not. Therefore, hon. 
Members may facilitate the discussion and passing of the Bill upto 
clause 55. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Now that the scope of the discussion has been 
narrowed down let us pass it as expeditiously as possible and avoid, if 
possible, even sitting during Dusehra. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru: May I suggest, Sir, that we sit on next 
Saturday ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I was not referring to that. 

Shri Jawaharlal Nehru : I know, Sir, I was merely suggesting about 
next Saturday. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That can always be done. But let us pass this 
as early as possible and not sit beyond 6th October, if it is possible to 
avoid it. 

Pandit Malaviya: Even if it is necessary to sit beyond 6th October, 
I hope we do not sit during Dusehra but sit afterwards. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That is accepted. We will not sit on any public 
holiday. 

Sardar B. S. Man : Lrankly speaking I am not able to understand 
completely 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: May I suggest that in discussing clause 2 
the relevant merits of all the clauses that follow need not be referred 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1087 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1087 

to. References here and there are enough. I therefore wish to draw 
the attention of the hon. Member who is on his legs and also other 
Members that while the applications of those other clauses may be 
generally indicated here and there, matters as to how they ought to 
be or ought not to be and how they ought to be modified and so on 
may all be taken up when we come to the other clauses. 

Shri Sarwate (Madhya Bharat): In case we are to postpone the 
final passing of this clause, would it not be better that all discussion 
on this clause be withheld to a later stage ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: We have already spent a sufficient time 
over this clause, hon. Members may now take it definitely that it is 
the view of the Government as stated by the Hon. the Law Minister 
that the effect of this clause will be confined only to marriage and 
divorce. On that footing it is open to hon. Members to say where it 
should or should not apply — to Sikhs or Buddhists or Hindus or to 
certain territories etc. The discussion will be confined to that extent 
only and not extend to other things. 

Pandit Malaviya : May I suggest for the consideration of the Hon. 
the Law Minister one procedure ? We may finish this discussion on 
clause 2 today. But after the discussion has taken place, instead 
of putting it to the House, we may leave it over. There may be no 
more discussion on it. I am only making a constructive suggestion. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have said so already. I will conclude the 
discussion and call upon the Law Minister at one o’clock. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar): If clause 2 will apply only to 
marriage and divorce, what will apply to the other clauses ? What 
about the other clauses of the Code ? What will be the application 
clause ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : All the other clauses also will be suitably 
modified. When they are taken up submissions may be made. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Are there to be two application 
clauses in the same Bill? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Hon. Members were either not here or 
were not hearing properly 

Shri Sarwate : I request one point to be made clear. We have tabled certain 
amendments. The amendments depend upon the scope of clause 2. So we may 
be allowed to move those amendments or take up those amendments later on. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1088 


1088 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Speaker : All the amendments are being discussed now. I am 
not going to allow any other amendments. Those amendments together 
with the clause, including the amendments moved by the Hon. the 
Law Minister, have been discussed. We have reached a stage. If in 
pursuance of all the other clauses that are taken up and adopted, 
we go back to clause 2 and any incidental amendments have to be 
made to clause 2, the discussion will be confined only to incidental, 
auxiliary and consequential amendments. Today we may take it that 
this must be over. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari: I want to have my doubts cleared on this 
point. I understand that clause 2 will apply only in cases of marriage 
and divorce. I want to know that when the inheritance chapter comes 
up will there be a saving clause in that and should it not apply to 
the rest ? This is not to apply to all but only to those who want to be 
governed. Will there be such a saving clause in that part ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : For the time being the Hon Minister and 
that this Code was confined to marriage and divorce and all the other 
general clauses also would be suitably changed. As to what will happen 
when another Law Minister or this Law Minister will introduce at 
that time, it is a matter of conjecture and it is too early to predict 
what will happen. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari: How can you allow this clause to be passed ; 
possibly it will be like the Damocle’s sword hanging over us. 

Mr, Deputy Speaker : Another clause will be introduced, a similar 
clause with suitable amendments and then the hon. Member can 
continue to speak as vigorously if not more vigorously. Let us not 
spend any more time on this. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : May I therefore, submit that as you are anxious 
to close the discussion at one o’clock today, the discussion may now 
start on the amendments rather than on the general aspects ; otherwise, 
we shall have hardly any time to deal with specific amendments which 
really matter so far as clause 2 is concerned. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There will be discussion both on the clause 
and the specific amendments. I am not going to allow any hon. Member 
merely because he has tabled an amendment just to go on speaking 
here. 

Shri Bhatt (Bombay): Sir, what has been decided today and what 
you have conveyed to the House, is that Clause 2 will not be put to 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1089 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1089 

the vote of the House today. I would, therefore, like to know whether 
any hope is left for us to move our other amendments in view of the 
stand taken by the Hon. Minister of Law today. Now he wants to 
enact the Marriage and Divorce Law separately. Will it be in order 
in this connection to table any amendment, as suggested by me 
previously, to the effect that the Law should be made applicable to 
the whole of India and would you permit it to be moved ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: You have already tabled an amendment to that 
effect. 

Shri Bhatt: The amendment tabled by me is not on the lines of a 
similar amendment that was moved in connection with the Sarda Act. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There is no good asking the Hon. Minister 
whether he wants it to be applied to every individual in this country 
and every part of this country. Amendments have already been 
tabled. Those amendments will be put to the vote of the House and 
if the vote decides against the Law Minister, he will gladly accept it. 
Therefore, there is no question of any further amendment regarding 
territorial restriction or restriction regarding communities. They are 
all before the House and I am not going to put them to vote today. 
I will put them later on. It is for the House to accept or reject so 
far as that matter is concerned. 

Pandit Maitra (West Bengal): The Hon. Law Minister says he 
has not agreed. He says “I will not gladly accept”. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I said gladly I will not accept. 

Shri Radhelal Vyas (Madhya Bharat) : On a point of order. May 
I know, as the debate on clause 2 will conclude today and also the 
Hon. Law Minister is replying, whether later on any amendment 
would be allowed to be moved to clause 2 at that stage ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Hon. Members are unnecessarily raising 
points of order. It is not for the hon. Minister to accept or reject 
an amendment. Consequential amendments, if found in order, will 
certainly be moved and allowed by the House. Secondly, the discussion 
on the amendments on clause 2 tabled today will conclude. If any 
new amendments come in as consequential to the clause that we are 
now going to pass, they will be placed before the House. 

Such consequential amendments to clause 2 will necessarily be 
made either by the Law Minister or by any hon. Member and then 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1090 


1090 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

discussion on the consequential amendments will follow and the original 
clause with the consequential amendments will all then be put to vote 
and ultimately accepted or rejected. 

Shri Ramlingam Chettiar : I do not know what a consequential 
amendment is. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I ask whether it is fair to discuss 
only divorce and marriage. Is this procedure adopted in any House in 
the world that we should discuss only divorce and marriage, without 
knowing the implications and the rights and duties of the husband 
and wife or how they will succeed each other ? I think this will be 
extremely disingenuous and the real context of cognate matters will 
be missed. 

Pandit Maitra : Sir, you just now ruled that only consequential 
amendments will be allowed to be moved but how could you know 
what is the consequence unless the amendments are put to vote and 
are either carried or rejected. Then we will be in a position to know 
what may be the consequential amendments. Therefore, this requires 
clarification. One cannot move a consequential amendment at a certain 
stage unless he knows the consequence after the amendments that have 
been tabled have been rejected or accepted. Unless one knows which 
particular amendment has been accepted or rejected, the question of 
a consequential change cannot arise. It is only when one knows the 
implications of a particular motion or amendment being accepted or 
rejected that the question of putting any consequential amendment 
would arise. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : Cannot the discussion, as to what is 
consequential and what is not, be allowed to be taken up afterwards ? 
That may take another six days. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: As I stated, subject to what the Hon. Law 
Minister may say — and I would like to have information — hon Members 
are anxious to know beforehand, whether any particular communities 
are going to be excluded and whether any particular territories are 
to be excluded — whether they have to be applied in part or wholly at 
one stretch etc. These are the subject matter of various amendments. 
This will apply not only to marriage and divorce but all the other 
things also. But there is nothing peculiar in this which cannot be 
applied as it is into marriage and divorce. As has been suggested by 
the Hon. Law Minister, he does not pursue the other matters. Only 
for the words “Hindu Code”, he might say that this is an amendment 
to that extent 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1091 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1091 

Dr. Ambedkar: I will say “an Act”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : “The marriage and divorce Act” instead of 
the word “Code”. What I feel that this must be put to the vote of the 
House. As soon as the Hon. Law Minister finishes his speech, I shall 
put it straightway to the vote of the House. 

Shri Ramalingam Chettiar : Rose — 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member’s issue has already 
been answered. Any hon. Member, who thinks that there are more 
progressive laws in the States, can table certain amendments to this 
clause when we come to the clause by clause stage and thus bring 
it into line with those State laws. The hon. Member has stated that 
there are such pieces of legislation in three States and for the sake of 
uniformity, there must be a central legislation, particularly in view of 
the fact that this is a Concurrent subject. It is not a difficulty which 
is insurmountable. 

Shri Ramalingam Chettiar: It is insurmountable. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Hon. Law Minister does not yield on 
that point. 

Shri Ramalingam Chettiar: I ought to be allowed to move an 
amendment. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: He has had an opportunity to move it. I 
am not going to allow any further amendments to be moved. What 
prevented him from moving this particular amendment before ? 
When the time comes, let me decide upon this amendment. We will 
assume that the clauses, inheritance etc. were before the House 
and we went on from day to day. This House may not wait until he 
chooses to bring this Bill in line with the State Legislatures. It is an 
unreasonable demand on the part of the hon. Member. Now so far as 
clause 2 is concerned this clause will apply to any part. With regard 
to the other parts, we will confine them only to those parts and not 
proceed with the other parts. For the purpose of clarification. I will 
not allow discussion to go on at length and on certain imaginary 
things which may not be placed before this House. We want to cut 
short the discussion and the Hon. Minister made that statement and 
has explained that the consequential amendment will only relate to 
the nomenclature of this Code. I will put it when we come to clause 
55 and even if that is passed in the third reading, we can have it. At 
one stretch I will allow the discussion and then the Hon. Law Minister 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1092 

1092 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

will reply. Then I will put all the amendments to the vote of the 
House so that there may be no difficulty as to whom it applies or 
whether they should take any further proceedings etc. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I just heard that you would call upon me at one 
o’clock. But I thought that there is some other business at one o’clock. 
Perhaps you might give me a minute to start. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : We must know the consequences of 
marriage and divorce; that is one thing. Then, Sir, you are willing 
to allow us discuss, about marriage and divorce and all that without 
knowing what the effect of the marriage would be, whether the issues 
of the marriage will get inheritance in this way or that way. That 
will put at a great disadvantage. I am going to contract a marriage 
and yet I do not know what the consequences are 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : We are opposed to it. 

Shri Deshbandhu Gupta : Are we to take it that the hon. Member 
is unaware of the consequences of marriage and divorce at this age ? 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : I take exception to this. Sir, I was pointing 
out 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : In all serious matters, the hon. Member has 
got a knack of introducing a good feeling of humour. To that extent 
he has relieved the tension. The hon. Member knows too well that 
he is directly responsible for all the acts that he commits whether 
on account of conjugal felicity or otherwise. Now, Sardar Man. 

*Sardar B. S. Man : You will sympathise with me, Sir, being a 
junior Member, for this interruption for so long a time. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member may confine himself 
to the amendment whether this Bill ought to apply or not. He has 
already said enough. 

Sardar B. S. Man : A little allowance due to a junior Member may 
be allowed to me, Sir. I am exactly in doubt as to what the intention 
of the Government is. There have been threats of certain reservations, 
mental reservations regarding moving certain amendments; then there 
was the explanation by the Prime Minister that they are not proceeding 
with the Bill except for these two parts because of lack of time. If, 
incidentally, the House is in a mood to finish it tomorrow, the same 
position will be there because there will be time to proceed with the 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 19th September 1951, pp. 2861-72. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1093 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1093 

rest of the Bill. It was a categorical question whether the Government 
proposed to drop the rest of the Bill, not in this session ; but whether 
the present Government is dropping the other portions, now or hereafter. 
These assurances are of little comfort to me that up to the 6th of October 
this will not be taken, or that it may not be taken in the present session 
or it may not be taken for lack of time. This sort of argument is no good. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I may clear the ground. I take the statement 
of the Hon. Law Minister, the sponsor of the Bill, as the authoritative 
opinion of the Government. On the footing that they will confine this 
Bill to marriage and divorce, the hon. Members may go on. That is how 
I have understood. If there is anything wrong. I may be corrected. 

Sardar B. S. Man : I was attaching equal importance to the Prime 
Minister’s statement also. I shall confine myself to my amendment that 
the Sikhs should be absolved from the operation of this Bill. 

The fact is that a certain erroneous impression has gained ground that 
the Sikhs are firstly, Hindus, and secondly, that they have been governed 
for a very long time by the Hindu Law. My case is that if I proved that 
the Sikhs were not Hindus and they were not governed to any appreciable 
extent by the Hindu Law, then, the Sikhs may be permitted to be out of 
the orbit of this Bill. In that point, I was interrupted again and again 
and asked how their law differed from the main body of the law. That 
was my difficulty. I had to prove that the entire mental structure of 
a Sikh agriculturist in the Punjab, in company with the Hindus and 
Muslims, was entirely different and the pattern of the present law is 
entirely different. 

Shri Bharati: So far as marriage is concerned ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : Even so far as marriage is concerned. Just wait. 

Shri Bharati: That is more important. 

Sardar B. S. Man : Let me quote Sir Charles Roe from his Tribal 
Laws in the Punjab. This has been cited with approbation by Sir William 
Clarke, Chief Justice in 55 Punjab Record 1903 Full Bench. 

He says : 

“The Hindu agriculturist of the Punjab...” 

The Hindu agriculturist follows the same law as the Sikh agriculturists, 
“...knows nothing of caste except as represented...” 

Now, Sir, certain prohibited degrees are being introduced in the 
marriage laws. I have to point out that my law as regards marriage’s 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1094 


1094 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is different and more liberal than the present Hindu Code Bill. In fact, 
I do not know, after all the present assurances that only 55 clauses 
will be finished whether it will be a Hindu Code or not, or what Code 
it will be. You are asking me to speak upon a Bill even whose name 
I do not know or whose operation I do not know. Anyway, I shall 
be guessing that it will be a Civil Code or it will be a Marriage Act 
or some such thing and the word “Hindu” shall drop out. He says : 

“The Hindu agriculturist of the Punjab knows nothing of caste except 
as represented by his tribe. No doubt, he respects the Brahman and 
calls him and feeds him on occasions of rejoicing or sorrow, but he would 
never dream of referring to him or to the Hindu Law for guidance in 
his daily life. If he has ever heared of the Dharmashastra at all, which 
is very improbable, he has only done so as a Spanish peasant may 
have heard of the Bible, he knows nothing whatever of its contents or 
principles, nor could the Brahman himself enlighten him. ..The Hindu 
law cannot be applied to the Hindu tribes, because they have never in 
fact followed or even heard of it and it is framed for a different state 
of society.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Extracts from books should be small ; it 
ought not to be reading whole books, chapter and verse. 

Sardar B. S. Man : The quotation was very long ; I have cut it 
short. 

I have read it only from the beginning and from the end. My 
difficulty is this. While I am forced to cite the law... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: What is the book ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : The book I am quoting from is Rustomji’s 
Customary law of the Punjab. This quotation relates to a decided 
case law in 55 Punjab Record 1903 Full Bench. 

I have to cite this law because in his previous speech the Hon. 
Dr. Ambedkar himself quoted a Privy Council decision showing that 
for a long time Sikhs have been governed by the Hindu Law. I am 
perfectly entitled today to remove that erroneous impression and 
show that we are not governed by the Hindu Law. As the position 
stands today, we are governed by a different set of laws. He relies 
upon his decisions. I rely upon my decisions. Hence the necessity 
to take some time of the House. I do realise your anxiety to finish 
this earlier. But Sir, this is the first time that an amendment has 
been moved that the Sikhs be absolved from the operation of this 
Bill and in view of the vital importance of this matter to the Sikh 
community, I may be permitted to digress a little. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1095 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1095 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Now that this Bill is confined to marriage 
and divorce, the hon. Member may show how far this is retrograde or 
inconsistent with his law and what is the harm in adopting this. 

Sardar B. S. Man : I am quoting exactly those laws which relate 
to marriage and divorce here. By the present law, certain prohibited 
degrees are sought to be introduced. I am proving that the prohibited 
degrees now sought to be introduced have never applied during the 
history of the Sikhs. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Cannot that be an exception ? As in the 
case of customs in the south allowing the marriage of maternal uncle’s 
daughter, which have been validated, any deviation from the generally 
prohibited degrees will also be put in as an exception. 

Sardar B. S. Man: Exactly, Sir, you are coming to my rescue. If the 
Hon. Law Minister says that so far as marriage customs are concerned, 
they will respect the customs of the Punjab or the customs of the Sikhs, 
I will have no quarrel ; I shall sit down. 

Shri Bharati: May I draw his attention to part (5) of cause 7 where it 
is provided, “unless the custom or usage governing each of them permits 
of a sacramental marriage between the two”. Custom is a local thing 
and that has overriding effect. We have already provided for all that, 
not only for south India. Where the custom provides for such a thing, 
it is straightway concerned. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : But what he wants is that all the 
things incidental to marriage should also be governed by custom. That 
is what he is pointing out. 

Shri Bharati : But he was speaking about prohibitive degrees and 
I pointed out that the necessary provisions are already there for these 
exceptions. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: No law says that a sister can marry a brother. 
There are prohibitive degrees accepted by courts and if there are other 
cases or other degrees, whether they come under clause 5 or clause 7 
or any other clause, suitable amendments can be suggested and the 
matter discussed. 

Sardar B. S. Man : My point is, since exceptions are made in the 
case of Muslims and Christians because their personal law is entirely 
different, why should we, though we are numerically small, not have 
the same... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member need not repeat his arguments 
over and over again. He has already stated that just like the Muslims, 
the Sikhs too should be excluded. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1096 


1096 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Sardar B. S. Man : Sir, may I seek the help of and invoke the 
good convention that is here in the House that whenever a law 
concerning the religious institutions of personal law of persons is 
concerned, the members of that community should be consulted and 
that their opinion should weigh ? I am invoking that convention. Will 
not that convention be made applicable to us here ? If that is made 
applicable, then the whole trouble will cease and I shall sit down. My 
argument is, if today you pass this law with the help of the majority 
in the House — may I be permitted to add — the Hindu majority of the 
House, because for the first time such terms as communities — Hindus 
and Sikhs — are being used in this debate and that is the primary 
bane of this law... 

Dr. M. M. Das (West Bengal): On a point of information, Sir 

Sardar B. S. Man : Is it a point of order, Sir ? Otherwise I am 
not yielding. 

Dr. M. M. Das: Is the hon. Member speaking on behalf of the 
Sikhs of the Punjab or on behalf of everyone in the Punjab ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Member is not yielding. I will not 
permit any more interruptions. 

Sardar B. S. Man : The difficulty is, hon. Members who are not 
.well acquainted with the law go on interrupting without understanding 
my point. As I was saying, that was a good convention and 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : That point has already been stressed by 
the hon. Member, that against the will of the community no personal 
law should be touched. That point will be considered by the House. 
The hon. Member may go to his next point. 

Sardar B. S. Man: Then coming to the marriage laws, here the 
present set of laws are very rigid. I may be permitted to quote here 
from no less an authority than my colleague here, Dr. Tek Chand, who 
has been a distinguished Judge. He has dealt with this point in his 
own lucid and clear fashion. And let me also add, that this quotation 
is from one who is not a Sikh himself, nor an agriculturist — a non- 
agriculturist — but one who is well acquainted with laws and with 
the Sikh laws and the customs and practices in the Punjab. Well, 
this is what he says : 

“It is well-known that Jats, specially Sikh Jats hold very liberal 

views on questions relating to marriage, and even at the height of 

the Brahmanical supremacy, they did not show much inclination to 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1097 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1097 

be bound by the cast-iron rules laid down in the later Hindu Smritis 
interdicting marriage outside the caste, and prescribing elaborate 
ritual for the performance of the marriage ceremony. Among them 
(Jats), the re-marriage of widows has all along existed commonly, and 
chadar-andazi in which the ceremonial has been reduced to the very 
minimum is one of the recognised forms of marriage.” 

And this is the view held by a learned Judge who was also a member 
of the Select Committee, and he has attached a minute of dissent on 
exactly this same point and on these same lines, that if you were to 
agree to only prescribed forms of marriages which are not sought to be 
introduced in this Hindu Code Bill, then you will be taking away from 
its orbit many forms of marriages which are customary and prevalent 
among the Sikhs in the Punjab. There is the Kareva marriage which 
is not a sacramental marriage. That is common in the Punjab. 

Dr. Ambedkar : What marriage ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : Kareva marriage, where the man and the 
woman, without calling anyone, with no priest, learned or otherwise, 
without going through any ritual, without going round the Granth 
Saheb or the fire, simply sit together and have a chadar thrown over 
them and that constitutes the marriage. Chadar-andazi also means 
the same thing. 

Shri Amolakh Chand (Uttar Pradesh): Is it a dharmic marriage ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : No, for the definition of dharma changes from 
time to time. Manu had his definition of dharma and there is another 
definition of dharma by Dr. Ambedkar. In this rapidly changing 
definition of dharma, I would rather not seek protection under such 
a dharma, but stick to my secular law which is quite clear to me and 
which I have been practising for long. 

Shri Amolakh Chand : Are the children legitimate ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : Quite. 

I am conscious of the retort of Dr. Ambedkar that he made in his 
speech last time. He says that when the people of the Punjab talk of 
marriage, they talk of many other things which 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I may point out that clause 8 and other 
clauses or forms of marriage are not necessarily applicable to the hon. 
Member. The Sikh community may have customs that bring about 
the relationship of marriage and these alone will be necessary. Why 
should we labour that point any further ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1098 


1098 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Sardar B. S. Man : My difficulty is, reading his last speech. I find 
that Dr. Ambedkar has said that Kareva marriages will not be permitted. 

Then there is clause 8 about other rituals. I may give yet another 
case where there is neither this Kareva marriage nor a sacramental one, 
but which is still in practice. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Whatever may be the form of the marriage — 
may be the covering by a cloth and all that, that is not prevented here. 

Sardar B. S. Man : If you will kindly permit me. Sir, I will make my 
point clear. In this form of marriage, they do not go through any ritual, 
nor even the flimsy ceremony of putting a chadar. If the man and woman 
have lived long enough in the village as to lead the village community 
to believe that they are husband and wife, irrespective of the fact that 
there was no ceremony, they should be taken as married husband and 
wife. There have been judicial decisions to this effect. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Even for that there is a presumption under 
the Evidence Act. 

Sardar B. S. Man : No, Sir. I beg to differ from you. Sir, on that 
legal point. They will not recognise it, if such a marriage does not come 
either under the definition of sacramental marriage or any other rites 
and rituals. The emphasis there is upon customary rites. One must have 
certain rites. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : How long should they live together? 

Sardar B. S. Man : There is a decided case. Again, Dr. Tek Chand 
says : 

“Indeed, the Rivaj-e-ams of the districts and the records of the cases 

decided judicially are full of instances in which mere cohabitation as 

man and wife for a long period without any strict matrimonial ceremony, 

has been considered sufficient to validate the marriage.” 

That is the state of the law in the Punjab. As regards these marriages 
where the man and woman have lived together for a long time 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: What is the length of the time ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : In cases it was decided as seven years, in 
certain others as 20 and there are cases where it was decided as four 
or five years also. The validity of the marriage is judged by their day- 
to-day conduct in village community and not by certain ceremonies. 
But this form of marriage is not recognised by Dr. Ambedkar. He 
says “I will not permit this sort of immorality”. He calls it “marriages 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1099 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1099 

made easy”. It may be easy for me but I am not going to respect certain 
empty rituals. The sanctity of a marriage must be the attachment of 
the parties to it and their mutual conduct. It is immaterial whether 
certain rituals have been performed or not. 

Rev. D’Souza (Madras): On a point of information, may I know 
whether in those cases the conditions requisite to validate the marriage 
were there or whether the mere fact of cohabitation was recognised, 
even if there was a previous marriage of one of the parties ? 

Sardar B. S. Man : I shall come to that later. I am only talking 
about forms of marriage. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member has not appreciated 
the position. The point is when a marriage is presumed, there must 
be conditions regarding propinquity or that it does not contravene 
prohibited degrees or that the woman is not already a married woman. 
Is it an instance of a married woman living with another man who 
becomes her husband ? All the pre-requisities of marriage must be 
there: mere cohabitation is not enough. 

Sardar B. S. Man : Under the general law, if the other conditions 
are not there the courts will interfere. That is not within the scope 
of this Bill. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : This refers to forms of marriage. Even the 
simple marriage where the bride and bridegroom sit together and a 
cloth is thrown over them is covered by this Bill and it is allowed. 
Even if that cloth is thrown away in the ceremony it is allowed. I do 
not know whether the hon. Member wants to press the proposition 
that a marriage should be valid whatever might be the degree of 
prohibition. 

Sardar B. S. Man : If a certain custom is barbaric or against public 
conscience or public morality, I will not for one moment accept that 
custom. You are giving two forms of marriage, dharmic and civil. I 
am giving you instances of other forms of marriage. You have been 
kind enough in your interpretation to say that Kareva marriages will 
be included. But undoubtedly certain rituals or rites are involved. I 
consulted others about marriages where there is no ceremony at all 
and where the man and woman merely live together long as husband 
and wife. The question was whether she was already a married woman 
and her husband was alive. Even if the husband was alive, the fact 
of seperation was there and if she was still the wife of another man, 
then it would be an offence punishable under the ordinary law. The 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1100 


1100 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

question is about marriages which are presumed to be valid even when 
there are no ceremonies nor rituals but a prohibition is sought to be 
introduced in that regard here. In the Punjab people do marry cousins. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: This does not abrogate the provisions of the 
Evidence Act and this is not inconsistent with that clause of the Act, 
namely that a man and woman living together was sufficient proof of 
marriage. 

Sardar B. S. Man : After the promulgation of this law, doubts will 
be expressed by the courts about the validity of such marriges and the 
only relief given is that the marriage shall be registered. If the Law 
Minister says that even such marriages, which were not performed 
strictly but by virtue of the parties living together for a long period and 
their mutual conduct, they will be considered as husband and wife and 
will not be forced to go to a registrar to register their marriage, then 
my apprehensions will be removed. 

Shri Tyagi: Both the parties must be willing. 

Sardar B. S. Man : Of course, you must have a willing wife and 
husband. ( Interruption ) My friend Prof. Yashwant Rai asks whether such 
cases are very common among the Jat sikhs. They are common among 
them along with the Scheduled Castes and specially his own particular 
caste in the Punjab. 

The idea of the present Bill is codification. Codification presupposes 
the existence of certain laws. If we are honest and want to proceed with 
the codification, the existing laws should be included there. But this 
codification under the present Bill is not only a codification of existing 
laws but so far as the Sikhs and the agriculturists of the Punjab are 
concerned it is an exclusion of their laws {An Hon. Member: Modification) 
or modification to such an extent that the original is completely lost 
that it is altogether alien and in many respects obnoxious to us and is 
thrust down our throats. 

Voltaire said : 

“That the more vast a State is in size and composed of different 
peoples, the more difficult it becomes to unite all together by one and 
the same jurisprudence.” 

Only two days ago, the Prime Minister replying to a question why 
11 AM there was no national dress in India said that in a vast 
country which stretches from the borders of Central Asia to 
Kanya Kumari in the south, different people are used to different customs 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1101 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1101 

and it is very difficult to have one national dress. What applies to 
physical clothes applies equally to legal clothes — legal clothes which 
are sought to be tailored by Dr. Ambedkar. When a similar attempt 
was made before, considering the inadvisability of such a thing, it 
was given up. The Punjab Laws Act has almost been a Bible for 
us, incorporating the principle of customary laws : the present form 
of the law which rules and holds the field is section 5 of the Act. 
Mind you, for so long a time as from 1872 we had had this law in 
operation and now suddenly at the fag end of the session, when 
we have not even comprehended the exact consequences of this not 
very revolutionary, but a completely novel and retrograde law, we 
are called upon to accept it. I for one have failed to comprehend 
it because my structure of society has been built upon pretty good 
customs which have held the field for so long, in regard to succession, 
property of females, marriage, divorce, dowry and so on. It contains 
every conceivable item of legislation. It says: 

“Any custom applicable to the parties concerned, which is not 
contrary to justice, equity or good conscience and has not been 
by this or any other enactment altered or abolished, and has not 
been declared to be void by any competent authority shall be the 
customary law.” 

When on that occasion such an attempt was being made, another 
person as intelligent as Dr. Ambedkar, Sir George Campbell, who 
was then in charge of Law, made these observations which are 
applicable even today. The bill sought to lay down that Hindu Law 
and Muslim Law should be applicable to the parties concerned. The 
amendment was successfully introduced and hence the present law, 
that is section 5 of the 1872, Act based on that amendment, namely 
that the Hindu Law or the Muslim Law will be applied only in the 
absence of customs. Sir George Campbell said: 

“If the Council would accept the amendment of which he had 
given notice, it was his impression that a great part of the objections 

to the Bill would be removed If enacted that the 

Muhammadan Law in cases, where the parties were Muhammadans 
and the Hindu Law in cases where the parties were Hindus, should 
form the rule of decision, except where the law had been altered, 
or abolished by legislative enactment, or was opposed to the 
provisions of the Act. He was quite willing to admit that certain 
simple rules, excepted from the Hindu and Muhammadan Law had 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1102 


1102 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to a certain extent had force in the Punjab ; but it appeared to 
him that a section of this kind would import into the Punjab, not 
the simple law of the Province but the whole of the complications 
of the written Hindu and Muhammadan Laws and the whole of 
the voluminous case law comprehended in the decisions of the 
Courts all over the country. That he regarded with the gravest 
apprehension. He should so regard it, not only because it would 
open a wide door for lawyers, but because it was not the law of 
the Punjab. Not one out of ten — perhaps not one out of a hundred 
persons in the Punjab was governed by the strict provisions of the 
Hindu and Muhammadan Law.” 

An attempt was made then also to codify but may I say that 
codification makes the law rigid whereas custom is not rigid ? 
Codification and legal enactments come from the top whereas 
customs represent the living conditions and the wisdom of the 
community. Customary law owes its development and its strength 
to the fact that it comes from the community down below and grows 
upwards ; it is not reactionary as enacted law is, which restricts 
growth. Whereas the enacted law restricts growth, the customary 
law imbibes the best points and the practicability of the situation. 

I will finish by saying that those who believe in the present sort 
of codification should be alive to the dangers of such a thing, the 
effect of which is always to hinder the development, independence 
of judgment and independence of will of the communities, which 
vary according to the varying needs and the spirit of the people. 
I say, with all due respect to Dr. Ambedkar’s ability to fashion 
out clothes, legal clothes — a sort of Amritdhara which will suit 
every disease from the south to the north — with all due respect to 
him, I beg to say that the clothes that he is trying to fashion out 
and tailor will be either too loose for southerners or be too tight 
for the northerners. It is much better that he should look to my 
size — look at the size of the society and its needs — and fashion and 
tailor the clothes accordingly and not give me ready-made clothes, 
ready-made medicines, a sort of Amritdhara for every disease. I 
request that no attempt should be made upon me as a Sikh to 
foist any law which is alien and repugnant to my spirit. I for one 
will not accept it, will not at any rate respect it because I have 
not respected the ancient Brahmans and much less shall I respect 
any modern Brahmans. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1103 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1103 

*Pandit Malaviya : I have not so far taken any time of this House 
at any stage with regard to the Hindu Code Bill. I had been hoping 
all this time that the evil day would never come when we would be 
faced with the need of seriously applying ourselves to a proposal of the 
nature that is before us. I had known, and many of us had known, the 
intense desire and keenness of some people in this House and outside, 
it to have the Code enacted, but we had somehow felt that the obvious 
could be seen, that the preponderating public opinion throughout the 
length and breadth of this land would not be ignored, and even while 
the idea was being toyed with, no serious attempt would be made to 
put on the statute book a Bill which should affect the very foundations 
and the entire fabric of the society of the people of this land, in the 
haphazard manner in which it has been proposed to be done. People 
have been agitating in this country either for one view or the other and 
many who have felt distressed over the prospect of such a law being 
enacted have been doing what they could to draw the Attention of the 
Government to the widespread resentment and dissatisfaction against 
it. But personally, I have not once stood up anywhere on a public 
platform, not once have I tried to take part in any such agitation, in 
the hope and faith that a thing so wrong in principle, so atrocious in 
details and so uncalled for in expediency would never come up seriously 
before the House. But one lives and learns and I am now faced with the 
spectacle that in Parliament which is now on the last lap of its journey, 
a controversial measure which is going to affect the lives of more than 
300 million people is going to be taken up and an attempt is going to 
be made to enact, it and to put it on the statute book to the teeth of 
fierce opposition to it. I do not say that there is nobody in this country 
who supports the principle of this Bill ( Pandit Maitra : Very few). I 
do not wish to say that there are not people who are honestly of the 
opinion that it is in the interests of society that such a law should be 
enacted. I have no quarrel with them. I am a Hindu and intolerance 
in any shape or form — intellectual or ideological — does not come to me. 
If, therefore, there are people in this country who feel that a measure 
of this nature or that a measure of even a more revolutionary nature 
should be applied to society, I may not agree with them — I may regret 
their opinion — but I can have no quarrel with them. I will, therefore, 
not take the position that there is no one in this country who wants 
this Bill. But it is obvious and it is something which only those can fail 
to see who would not see, that by far the largest majority of the people 
are not only not in favour of this Bill 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 19th September 1951, pp. 2872-96. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1104 


1104 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Some Hon. Members : Question. 

Pandit Malaviya: but are feeling seriously disturbed over it. 

They are today nonplussed and do not know what they should do in the 
face of the danger of such an enactment being made. (. Interruption ). Some 
friends of mine, tamely and in a parrot-like manner, probably by the 
force of habit, go on saying ‘question’. I challenge them in all humanity 
to come and question my statement anywhere in this country. I have 
expressed the opinion in a meeting of the congress Party Members of 
this Parliament at another place that in a matter of such universal 
importance, even if it be not legally wrong to make any enactment in 
this way, it is the height of moral injustice that we should take up 
such a matter without giving the amplest possible opportunity to those 
who are affected by it to express themselves upon the issue. I have 
said that in a matter of this nature, the very minimum that we can 
expect should be that the issue should be put before the electorate at 
a General Election or that indeed a referendum should be allowed to 
be taken upon it. 

Shri Bharati: On monogamy ? 

Pandit Malaviya : My esteemed friend Shri Bharati has obviously 
one and only one stale card to play on all occassions, right or wrong, 
relevant or irrelevant. I shall come to that card in due course and 
shall show what value that hand of his has. But the interruption by 
the word ‘monogamy’ is not going to take away from my argument that 
in this matter the only right course for us to follow is that we should 
have a referendum in this land to allow people to express themselves 
on this issue and then if we find that there is even a fair minority — I 
go to that length ; my challenge is not couched in any spirit of doubt 
or fear — I say that if as a result of a referendum even a substantial 
minority of the people are in favour of such a measure, by all means let 
us sit down seriously to the task of framing it. If that be not possible. 
I would ask my hon. friends who question my statement to persuade 
the Government of the day and the law Minister of the day to allow 
half a dozen people to resign their seats — I am prepared to be one of 
them — and let us have bye-elections in four weeks’ time distinctly on 
the issue of this Code 

Shri Bharati: On monogamy ? 

Pandit Malaviya: and if out of those six even in a few 

constituencies in those bye-elections the protagonists of the Hindu Code 
Bill get returned... 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1105 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1105 

An Hon. Member: In north India ? 

Pandit Malaviya: Anywhere in the whole country — if they get 
returned, then I shall be prepared to withdraw my opposition. 

Shri Munavalli (Bombay): Challenge accepted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There are two sides to the picture. Let 
him proceed. 

Pandit Malaviya: I do not mind the interruption. Words are of 
two types. One is words which are mere sound; the other is words 
which have a meaning and when any Member says ‘Challenge 
accepted’ I would wish he meant that and not merely created the 
sound. 

Shri Munavalli: I mean it. 

Pandit Malaviya : My request is this. Let the government, let 
the Law Minister, put the Bill to that test and if they are willing 
to do that, then I am willing to propose — and I hope other Members 
also who feel like me will be willing to agree — that we should have 
a session even before the elections for a week, after the results 
of those bye-elections are known, to work in accordance with the 
results. But the Members who say that they accept this challenge 
say it, if I may say so without meaning any disrespect, knowing 
that they will have no occasion to be put to the test. The only 
way in which we could decide about this matter is by one of these 
courses. If we are not going to do that, then I do not know how 
to accept the questioning of my statement that by far the largest 
majority of the people in this land are entirely opposed to the 
provisions of this Bill. {An Hon. Member: Question.) And when I 
say this, I am not referring merely to those people who are called 
“orthodox”, but I am referring even to the most advanced of the 
advanced people of this country, people who find themselves weak 
and wanting in the strength to stick to the restrictions which time 
and experience of the elders of this nation have imposed upon us, 
who wish to have the easy way of life, who wish to have the good 
of both the worlds for themselves, who wish to remove restrictions 
and restraints which have descended through the ages, through 
the millennia that have gone before us reaching back into the dim 
unknown past of human history; the traditions, the culture, the 
life, the ideology, the principles of the one race which can claim 
with pride that it has had a continuity of that tradition from time 
immemorial. Those gentlemen today are impatient and I wish to 
submit that even from their point of view, from the point of view of 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1106 


1106 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

even those who are impatient of even the existing restrictions, who would 
rather liken our society to an aping of some other society somewhere 
else, irrespective of the suitability or otherwise of such application to 
our particular genius ; even to them this Bill cannot be acceptable. It 
is on that basis that I make the claim that by far the large majority of 
people in this country are opposed to it. The orthodox people, those who 
have their roots in the traditions of old, are upset over it. But those who 
have a certain amount of social liberty 

Dr. M. M. Das : On a point of order. The hon. Member is only repeating 
what has been said ad nauseam in this House. He has no new argument; 
he is only repeating what other Members have said. 

Pandit Malaviya : I had heard that in the case of a certain type of 
mankind, which is often under the influence of a certain intoxicating 
habit, even some of the best victuals placed before him bring him nausea ! 
I am not surprised at my hon. friend ! 

Shri Bharati: Will it not facilitate clarity of understanding if the 
hon. Member confines his remarks only to the subject under discussion, 
namely, marriage and divorce ? 

Pandit Malaviya : I have probably not the clarity and the ability of 
my hon. friend Mr. Bharati. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I myself wanted to suggest to the hon. 
Member that now that the scope is limited to marriage and divorce, 
his observations may be confined to those. The hon. Member may feel 
that the points made by him may not have been put as forcibly as he 
is doing at present. Anyhow some of them have been covered : he need 
not go into them at great length and may confine his observations to 
points which have not been touched. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari: I would respectfully like to point out that 
even if there are repetitions, we should like to know the opinion of a 
distinguished person like Pandit Malaviya. 

Dr. M. M. Das : On a point of privilege — the hon. Member is making 
a distinction between one Member and another. 

Pandit Malaviya : I lay no claim to that distinction : I do not think 
any hon. Member need be frightened by it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I expect this debate to conclude today ; let 
there not be any more interruptions. 

Pandit Malaviya : I am greatful to you for your guidance. What I 
submit is that the Bill may have one clause in it relating to the social 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1107 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1107 

structure of the Hindus or may have a hundred clauses in it 
relating to the social structure. But if it is going to affect the social 
structure of the Hindus, nobody can proceed with the matter unless 
he discusses that social structure and the way that clause is going 
to affect it. Social structure cannot be taken piecemeal in watertight 
compartments. It is not practicable. 

After the discussion that has gone on before, I have a feeling that 
it will not be quite possible and correct to take a lop-sided attitude 
about one particular matter alone and leave the general aspect out. 
But I might assure you, Sir, that I shall throughout be guided by 
yourself and if at any stage you should think that I should not carry 
on with any particular argument that I may be making, I shall at 
once obey you. 

It has been said that this Bill will now be confined to the two 
items of marriage and divorce. As the Hindu society stands, its entire 
structure rests upon the foundation of marriage. There is nothing 
in Hindu society which can be separated as unconnected with the 
marriage system of the Hindus. It is, therefore, not possible to discuss 
the marriage section of the Hindu society-without referring to the 
general aspect of the society as a whole. Whatever I was saying 
applies directly to the item of marriage and divorce also. What I 
was saying was that it is therefore as much the orthodox section of 
the people who will be opposed to this measure as the others — about 
whom so much has been said by some hon. Members in this House 
yesterday and the day before, as forming nearly eighty per cent of the 
population, among whom it was said the very provisions which have 
been proposed in this Bill exist today. I have my own doubts if that 
is so. For the large majority of those people who have today facilities 
of divorce and easy marriage, the provisions of this Bill are going to 
make a world of difference. I am not expressing any opinion of my 
own on the merits of these proposals. I am merely mentioning that 
to the simple men living in the villages today, who have not had the 
opportunity and benefit of the same growth, intellectually, morally, 
emotionally and spiritually, as some other members of society, like 
my esteemed friend the Hon. the Law Minister, have had — to them 
the habit of restraint, the habit of a discrimination between the finer 
shades of the good and the better, the bad and the worse, does not 
come so normally and spontaneously in some matters at least as it 
does to the others. Hindu society has been divided into groups not with 
any inhuman or malicious object of injuring any section or doing any 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1108 


1108 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

injustice to any section. I do not wish it to be misunderstood that I do 
not believe that injustice has been done to some sections of it. Injustice 
has been done, hardships have been inflicted, atrocious hardships have 
been inflicted, and there will be no reasonable man who will hold any 
brief for the same. But I am talking of the principles and the broad 
concept on which those divisions were based. They were not meant to 
injure, they were not meant to inflict any hardship. 

Shri Munavalli: But what has been the effect ? 

Pandit Malaviya : The effect will take me long to describe, because 
the effect has been varying from age to age and if my hon. friend will 
take the trouble of reading through the pages of history he will know 
them well enough for himself. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : But is a discussion on that point necessary 
for marriage and divorce ? 

Pandit Malaviya : What I was wishing to point out was that in the 
very nature of things we can only expect one thing from one individual 
and another thing from another. If any abstruse point of law arises 
today, we can reasonably and legitimately request our learned Law 
Minister to put us wise on all aspects of it. You may not be able to 
get the same information and the same light from an ignoramus like 
myself. {An Hon. Member: No, no.) {Another Hon. Member : That is only 
humility.) There may be equally another thing about which another 
individual may be able to tell us many things but about which my 
esteemed and dear and learned friend Mr. Bharati might prove a 
complete ignoramus. In society there is a class of people to whom the 
real zest of life, the real zest of existence, the incidence of life from 
moment to moment, from hour to hour, from morning to evening and 
from evening to morning, is, if not the in-all and out-all, a very large 
portion of the totality of their existence. For them today’s marriage 
and divorce laws have been framed with a view to simplicity and 
easy availability. A man can today, or a woman can today discard a 
marriage relation and take up another almost in the twinkling of an 
eye. Such people will have to wait for months, they will have to go 
through law courts, they will have to go through the entire gamut of 
procedure before they can do the same under the provisions in this 
bill. I am not expressing any opinion on the merits of the matter. I 
should personally feel happy at, and I should like to congratulate the 
Law Minister for having conceived that improvement, but I am talking 
of the practical effects. In the practical effect there will be murders 
in the villages. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1109 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1109 

Dr. Ambedkar: We have enough police. 

Pandit Malaviya : For a man who is still in a large measure 
in the animal stage 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : Question. 

Pandit Malaviya : I do not say this in any sense of disrespect. I 
am only talking as a sociologist. If those men find new impediments 
put in their way, impediments to which they have not been used, to 
which they are not accustomed, and they find themselves thwarted 
in a tiresome manner, they may not have in themselves that 
much of restraint, they may not have in themselves that much of 
development and control that they should wait for the law, and 
society may be faced — among the eighty per cent of whom so much 
has been talked about — with an upheaval which is probably not 
even imagined today. Therefore, I said that this Bill is not only not 
welcome to those who, like me, would rather that the traditions 
which have come down from ages past should be respected and 
upheld, but even to those who are going to be affected by it in a 
much larger and more immediate measure. I may submit respectfully 
that some of the Members of this House who have been so loud and 
enthusiastic with regard to the provisions of the Bill have little in 
common with those people. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Not even me. 

Pandit Malaviya : Certainly not the Hon. Law Minister ! The 
Hon. Law Minister has been likened, even profanely, to no less a sage 
than Manu himself and I am reminded of a shloka. ( Interruption ) 
Somebody asks me why I am jealous. Unfortunately or fortunately 
I am not so built that I should have the privilege of being jealous 
towards the Hon. Law Minister. 

Dr. Ambedkar: How can a Brahman be jealous of an untouchable ? 

Pandit Malaviya: Better tell them ! I am reminded of a shloka 
where Kumbhakarna asks Ravana ( Interruption ). If hon. Members 
will just bear what that shloka says, probably they will feel slightly 
better human beings than before. Kumbhakarna asks Ravana why in 
his attempt to win over Sita’s mind, with all his demoniac powers of 
changing his appearance, he does not take the shape of Rama when 
going to her, and Ravana says : “The trouble is, the moment I take 
the shape of Rama or think of him, the mere association with the 
thought of Rama makes it impossible for any evil thought to come 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1110 


1110 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

into my mind ! {Hear, hear). {Hon. Members : Repeat the shloka.) 
I will repeat many shlokas if my hon. friends will get me the time 
for it. Similarly, about Manu. I was saying that if we can expect 
a certain thing from members of this House — of course, there can 
be no possibility of their needing to go through divorce in matter 
of minutes — we may not hope that the same thing will be done by 
those 80 per cent of people also. Therefore, we should be cautious 
in our approach to this matter. If anybody can controvert that 
aspect of things. I would like to hear him do so. 

I, therefore, repeat that this Bill is not only disapproved by the 
orthodox sections of the people but also by far the largest majority 
of the inhabitants of this land. {Some hon. Members : No. No.) 
Somebody says, “For other reasons than what you have stated”. 
May be, but the fact remains, that whatever the reasons it is not 
approved by the large majority of the people. 

I shall come to the Bill itself. It has been said that as only 
Part II of the Bill is now to be proceeded with, it is not necessary 
now that this Bill should be called the Hindu Code Bill. Indeed, 
irrespective of the fact whether the other Parts were excluded 
from it or not, personally, I should have had a little less objection 
to the Bill if it had not been called the Hindu Code Bill. In our 
Constitution we have given the name “India, that is Bharat” to 
our country. Why was this Bill not called the Indian Code” ? I am 
not going into that question that it should apply to everybody. I 
am not concerning myself with that. I am not saying this on that 
basis. But this country being named “India”, if this code, had been 
called the “Indian Code”, it would have had a different meaning 
and import. Once we say the “Hindu Code” the entire picture of 
what that word denotes comes to the mind. We must, therefore, 
know and keep into view what the word “Hindu” means. It is a 
difficult word to explain in a sentence. But if there is one feature 
in Hinduism which one might mention as of outstanding pre- 
eminence, it is the practically limitless tolerence and catholicity of 
that system. Our Prime Minister, Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru, has 
himself talked of Hinduism and has said that it is probably best 
described by saying that it rests on the principle of live and let 
live. We have among the Hindus the most diametrically opposed 
viewpoints. We have in the highest caterie of sacred literature and 
philosophical schools the six Darshanas, one of which sparkles with 
the brilliance of the razor-sharp incision and acumen of the intellect 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1111 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1111 

of supermen and giants like Jaimini. Shankar and Kumarila — I do not 
wish to use any adjectives of praise for them because it will be difficult 
to find suitable words — and on the other hand, it contains another 
system which is so obtuse, which is so crude, to say nothing worse, 
that it would refuse to see or understand anything which is not strictly 
before its physical eyes. The poor Charvaka, with the palm of his hand 
up before him, would refuse to understand that the back side of his 
hand also exists because it would not be pratyaksha. . . . 

Dr. M. M. Das : On a point of order, we have not come here to hear 
lectures on Hindu philosophy and ancient rishis.. . . 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Order, order. I find the hon. Member is very 
impatient. He must have consideration for the other side of the view. 
I never expected that the hon. Member would go on interrupting. I 
repeatedly say that this is a contentious matter and we are allowing 
sufficient time. I am also alive to the fact that a number of hon. 
Members have spoken. I am not concluding the debate now. The less 
the number of interruptions the greater the chance that he will finish 
it early. Otherwise, he will demand another day. 

Pandit Malaviya : I was only pointing out the wide diversity and 
catholicity of philosophical and methaphysical thought prevalent among 
the Hindus. I wish there were no need at all for anybody to talk of the 
philosophical side of things. I wish one could feel that it was unnecessary. 
But, from such remarks it seems it is unfortunately necessary. What I 
was mentioning was that even in the Darshanas, while we have the pure 
Vedant on the one hand, we have the drunken reveller of a Charvaka 
philosopher, indulging in the five makaras ! I shall not go into those 
five makaras 

Some Hon. Members : Go on. go on. 

Pandit Malaviya : because apart from my own reasons of 

decency, probably I may take it that some of even those Members who 
may not be deeply interested in philosophical thought might be familiar 
with them ! 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : How are they useful for the discussion on 
this subject ? 

Pandit Malaviya: What I was trying to point out was 

Dr. Ambedkar: I submit the makaras are very useful. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Will this in any way corrupt the makaras ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1112 


1112 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Pandit Malaviya : We have that diversity even in the principal 
Darshanas. Among them, again, we have the Astik Darshanas and 
the Nastik Darshanas. We have Darshanas which have talked of the 
monotheistic principle of Parabrahma and Brahma and Jiva and also 
which have talked of the atheistic philosophy of No-Brahma and No-Veda 
and No-God. We have in other spheres also equally diverse opinions and 
diverse state of things existing. There are some people today who find it 
fashionable to remind us that there were certain rishis and other among 
the Hindus who were beef-eaters. Side by side with that, Hinduism is 
replete with a universal reverential regard for the cow. We have in the 
Hindu society youthful marriages; we have also in the Hindu society 
youthful sanyasis. We have in the Hindu society the most austere and 
difficult to imagine tapas; we have also in the Hindu society the most 
luxurious and lavish enjoyment of the senses. We have in the Hindu 
society the Brahman ; we have the chandala ; not the Chandala for whom 
we have only restrictions and impositions, but the chandala for whom 
rights and privileges have been prescribed, just as for the Brahmans 
( Interruption ). 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It is an offence hereafter under the Constitution 
to call any person a chandala or an untouchable. 

Pandit Malaviya : There are so many speakers around all at once, 
that I am unable to hear you, Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Apart from any constitutional aspect, reference 
to chandala is no longer advisable. It has been made an offence under 
the Constitution. 

Dr. Deshmukh: He is only referring to history. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There may be some history, but all history is 
not very good to mention. Let us forget some history. 

Pandit Malaviya : I was referring to it not as to an individual, but 
as to a system in the past. However, I will abide by what you have said. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Why should you ? 

Pandit Malaviya : The hon. Law-Minister asks, why I should. Only 
because I am a law-abiding Member and not the other name that I had 
been mentioning. 

I was saying that in Hindu society we have had that variety of things 
existing side by side in honour and in peace. That has been the great 
feature of Hinduism. But that catholicity and that tolerance was possible 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1113 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1113 

only because there were some basic principles, fundamentals which 
went to form the root of all things which were first settled and 
ordained, and which have been maintained through the ages without 
question or dispute ; not narrow sectarian dogmas or rituals, nor 
any controversial things or rules, but certain basic fundamental 
principles which were considered as sine qua non of the continued, 
stable and smooth existence of society. These principles may be called 
by any name ; but they remain the eternal bedrock upon which any 
healthy society must rest. In this country, the name given to these 
principles was sanatana : sanatoria not meaning, unfortunately, as a 
learned speaker said yesterday, that which is always changing and 
nitya nootana, but as something which has always existed. Therefore, 
if we undertake the task of making any changes in the structure 
of Hindu society, we must be careful that, tamper as much as we 
might with the outward forms and paraphernalia, with the leaves 
and branches, we do not apply the axe to the root of the tree itself; 
that we do not disturb and that we do not uproot the fundamentals, 
the basic principles upon which society has been based, and which 
have carried it through the ravages of time as nothing else has 
carried any other society known to man in the world. Therefore, we 
must first understand what those basic principles are. 

I was slightly taken aback when I heard it said by no less than three 
august personages who go to form the Government of this country 
^ ^ today, that the provisions contained in the proposed 

Hindu Code Bill are in accordance with what is found 
in the Hindu Shastras. I have also heard it said that a profound 
study has been made of those Shastras in order that this Bill might 
be put up in this form. One would naturally hesitate to cross swords 
with men of so learned a disposition. But the Hindu Shastras have 
been the property of the world for the ages. Many people have 
read them or can read them. With the very limited knowledge that 
I am privileged to have of them, it has not been possible for me 
to find justification for that statement so far. I would, therefore, 
suggest that if it is the claim of the Government that they are 
basing the Hindu Code Bill upon the sanctions contained in the 
Hindu Shastras, then we should proceed on that premise. It will 
be different, however, if a wider stand is taken and it is said that 
it is not the Hindu Shastras, it is not the sanctions contained in 
them, but it is the wisdom and the whim and fancy of the farmers 
of this Bill, it is the inclinations and the desires of those who are at 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1114 


1114 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

its back, which have been the determining factors in the preparation 
of its clauses and details. To the best of my knowledge, no such 
statement has been made so far. I will, therefore, proceed on the 
assumption that the claim remains that the Bill and its provisions 
are based on the Hindu Shastras. If that is so, I would like very 
much to get a clarification from the Law Minister as to how that 
point is to be determined, as to what is said on a particular point 
in the Hindu Shastras and what the meaning of that statement in 
the Shastras is. I know what I am saying must mean mere waste 
of time for a man like the learned Law Minister, because, I have no 
doubt, that he is familiar with the meaning of what I am saying. But 
we the Members of this Parliament are here to legislate on a vital 
issue, and if we are going to legislate on a matter of such universal 
importance, and if we are going to do it on the basis of a certain 
thesis, namely, that it is being done in accordance with the tenets 
of Hindu Shastras. I feel that it is our duty that we the Members 
of this House should then keep in mind the rules, the methods, and 
the recognised procedure by which the meanings of the Shastras 
and their words are interpreted. The Mimansa applies itself to that 
high purpose, because in a society like that of the Hindus, where 
the law came not from a Government or from a Minister, howsoever 
high and mighty 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh): Please address the Chair. 

Pandit Malaviya : My hon. friend Shri Sidhva asks me to address 
the Chair. I have been doing nothing else. I wish Mr. Sidhva would 
not forget so easily. 

The Members of this House should know that in a society like that 
of the Hindus where everything has been based — for, God only know 
how many millions and millions of years, or thousands and thousands 
of years — upon certain texts coming down through the ages; where we 
had not the printing presses or the printing paper, where everything 
had to be committed to memory and had to be passed down from the 
teacher to the pupil and from the sire to the son, where everything 
depend upon the correct pronunciation and intonation and upon the 
correct text and upon the correct interpretation of old and ancient 
words and mantras , where new codes and new treatises, not printed 
on paper, but in the minds and memories of men came up from time 
to time and had to be assigned their right importance and place; in 
such a society, disaster would have followed if the most minute, if the 
most exhaustive and positive rules had not been laid down for the 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1115 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1115 

interpretation of those texts. And in the Mimansa we have it laid down 
how any text of the Srutis or the Smritis should be interpreted. It is 
also laid down that the meaning of the law cannot be known merely 
by looking at a sentence at one place. So many tests — proving tests — 
have to be applied to it. 

[Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava in the Chair] 

If, therefore, it is the claim of the government that the Hindu Code 
Bill is based on principles and tenets contained in the Hindu Shastras, 
my earnest request is that we should carefully and according to the 
rules, examine the various provisions and then find out if they violate 
what is contained or laid down in the Shastras or not. My humble 
submission is that they are not only not in conformity with Hindu 
Shastras, but go diametrically against them. ( Interruption ) Somebody 
is saying at my back that I am now expanding. I wish my friend would 
understand that if I wished to expand these ideas it would take days 
to finish. 

Shri Munavalli: That is your intention also. 

Pandit Malaviya : We have known of the concept of omniscience. I 
find that there is a new phenomenon of it here, who knows the minds 
of others. 

Shri Munavalli: Certainly. 

Pandit Malaviya : I congratulate the hon. Member. I wish to 
submit that I am trying to confine myself as rigidly as possible to the 
shortest possible limit. I am saying this with a sense of responsibility. 
Let any Member of this House who would like to have an exhaustive 
and expanded exposition of the points I have made, let him do me the 
honour of coming to me after this sitting and I will then make him 
see how much there is to say, how much there is to study, and ponder 
over each one of the points that I am only briefly mentioning here. 

I was submitting that if we have to go by the Shastras the whole 
matter simplifies itself, because there will then be no room for any 
difference or controversy. If the two parties to a case have agreed upon 
a measuring rod and there is no dispute about it, it should be easy then 
for any set of normal people to take up that yardstick and measure the 
cloth to the mutual satisfaction of both. If it is agreed that it is on the 
basis of the Shastras that we are going to enact this law, according 
to the rules of interpretation so clearly laid down, it should be easy 
for anybody and the hon. Law Minister to sit down, go through clause 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1116 


1116 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

by clause and determine. (. Interruption ) I see that the Hon. Law 
Minister has a very clear vision. The Law Minister or any other 
member or even myself may have any view of a matter. But when 
the hon. Law Minister and others agree that there is a yardstick 
by which a piece of cloth has to be measured, there can be no room 
for any difference or controversy. (. Interruption ). I have already 
mentioned but obviously it has not yet been sufficiently mentioned 
for my friend Mr. Bharati that there is a yardstick, which has come 
down to us from the ages, ( Shri Bharati : The measurement differs 
so widely) according to which the interpretation of the sacred texts 
has to be made. 

Shri Bharati: The difference in the yardstick is one inch to a mile. 

Pandit Malaviya : My friend Mr. Bharati says that the difference 
between the yardsticks is one inch to a mile. I do not know if I 
can say anything about that remark, because it carries in itself 
the visible and the obvious, that my esteemed friend is altogether 
unaware of the nature of the yardstick I have mentioned. There 
would be no question of any difference, not even one in one millionth 
of a millimeter. Therefore, if that can be agreed upon, I think, 
all controversy on this matter would end and there would be no 
need for us to say anything more at this stage. We can then easily 
leave it to the hon. Minister. I can place the entire matter in his 
hands not only as the umpire or the judge for those who are in 
favour of the Code but also for those who, like me, want him to 
go through the clauses, item, by item according to the text of the 
Shastras, interpret them through the Mimansa and apply them to 
the provisions of this Code and say if they do not militate against 
them. If he says that I shall be satisfied and I will offer no further 
opposition. I do not think anything more fair or reasonable could 
be said. If however, that cannot be done, the least we could ask 
for is that the claim that the Hindu Code Bill contains provisions 
which are all based upon what is contained in the Shastras, should 
be completely given up and withdrawn, so that the millions of our 
people who may not have the opportunity of being critical enough 
to examine the basis of such statements may not be misled by such 
entirely wrong and misleading statements and they may not fall 
into that dangerous pit. Probably the Bill may have been prepared 
innocently, but it has within it the potentialities for untold and 
immeasurable mischief. If that also cannot be done there can be no 
other way for Members of this House or those of them who feel like 
me, but to examine all these proposals in extensive detail in the 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1117 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1117 

light of what is said in the Shastras with regard to them. It will 
be a long process, because, if the claim is made that what is stated 
is according to what is laid down elsewhere, it can only be given 
up either by mutual agreement or by the weight of facts as distinct 
from opinions ; and establishing those facts can only mean that on 
every clause and every sub-clause, on every subject and almost on 
every word, this House should have the opportunity and the benefit 
of having its attention drawn to the relevant texts in the wide range 
of Shastras and law books of the Hindus. I do not know if that will 
be considered possible : I have no doubt it must be permissible ; 
but I do not know whether that will be considered possible and 
practicable. I would therefore beg the Government not merely in the 
interest of fairness and justice towards the subject which is before 
us and towards the people who are affected by it, but indeed in the 
interest of the progress of this Bill in this House, that they should 
re-examine their position on that point and either make up their 
minds to proclaim to the world that the Hindu Code is not based 
on the Hindu Shastras and does not care for what is laid down 
therein, and is the product of the wisdom and fancy of those who 
have prepared it; or, they should adopt the procedure which I have 
suggested, viz., have a thorough and nonpartisan examination made 
of each of the clauses and then bring up before this Parliament only 
those which, it is incontrovertibly agreed, are in accordance with the 
Shastras that have prevailed since so long. 

There are certain other difficulties also in this matter. This bill, it 
is now said, will confine itself only to the subjects of marriage and 
divorce. But my difficulty is that, that fact by itself does not make 
the slightest difference in the nature of this question. If there were 
any part of this Bill which was altogether uncontroversial and if 
that were taken up, I would understand that the same might have 
been allowed to go through this House without much difficulty or 
controversy. But can there be anything more fundamental, more 
controversial than the question of changing the laws of marriage 
among the Hindus? I submit it is not possible to think of anything 
more contentious. Somebody may say that the other parts of the 
Bill are more contentious — I am quite sure somebody else will 
equally emphatically say that the part relating to marriage and 
divorce is the most controversial. Therefore, the fact that it has 
been decided that the progress of this Bill will remain confined 
to these parts, does not make any change in the fundamental 
aspect of this question. We have therefore to be very cautious in 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1118 


1118 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

proceeding with it. I mentioned that the vast bulk of the people are 
against it, but there is something even more fundamentally wrong 
in the situation. The Hon. Law Minister himself at one stage, when 
on a previous occasion this matter was before this House, said in 
reply to an inquiry by an hon. Member that it was not intended at 
that time that his Bill should apply to the people of what was then 
called the Indian States. And in his usual, careful and accurate 
manner he said that if at any time the States came into the picture, 
the matter would have to be gone into entirety before it was 
taken up — or something to that effect; I am not quoting his words. 
Everyone knows that this Bill was not published in any Gazette of 
those States. It was published in the Gazette of the Government of 
India, it was published in the Gazettes of some of the Provinces, but 
because there was not thought to be any occasion for it, it was not 
published in the Gazettes of any of the States. And the people of 
the States did not therefore find themselves called upon to consider 
the matter; in fact, they had no concern with it whatsoever. What 
has been the result ? Today, by the fact of our new Constitution, all 
that territory forms part of the land and whatever is passed today is 
going to apply to the people of all those areas. Does anybody pause 
to consider the preposterous nature of the situation ? One-third of 
this country — not a little portion here or a little portion there — but 
whole one-third of this vast country 

Shri Munavalli: It is not so, because many States have already 
been merged in the provinces. 

Pandit Malaviya : My friend says “It is not so, because many 
States have been merged in the provinces”. I dare not controvert so 
wise a statement, but I thought that even before they were merged 
and surely since after their merger no publication of the Bill has 
been effected anywhere. 

Shri Munavalli: Question. 

Pandit Malaviya : My friend questions that statement. I think 
he is beyond me. One-third. I said and I repeat of this great sub- 
continent is going to be subjected to a law which is going to affect 
fundamentally the very foundations of their life and existence without 
their having had an opportunity to see what it is. 

Shri Lakshmanan : (Travancore-Cochin.): May I point out that in 
some part of States the Bill was published — in Travancore-Cochin, 
for instance ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1119 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1119 

Shri Bharati : I wonder if the hon. Member knows about any of the 
other States also. 

Pandit Malaviya : I do not belong to that school which refuses to see 
anything except the palm of its hand. I do not mind the interruptions 
because I know what I mean and I know what I am saying. I am not 
saying it merely because I wish to say something or because I should 
say things which would please anybody, but because I believe in what 
I say. No amount of interruption, no amount of cries of ‘Question’ can 
dislodge the truth. If a thing is true and correct, then whatever anybody 
may say and these ‘Questions’ only help to clarify matters. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Interruptions are helpful. 

Pandit Malaviya : Whether they are meant in a spirit of helpfulness 
or otherwise, I do not in the least degree mind them. If on a matter of 
such importance and gravity there are indeed any doubts in anyone’s 
mind and if any questions suggest themselves to any Member, I feel, on 
the contrary, that the object, the very ideal, of a parliamentary system of 
legislation would be defeated if that Member did not have the opportunity 
to raise his doubt and to ask his question, and if anybody who is on his 
legs, does not attempt to reply to his best ability to the question that 
is asked. I therefore do not object to interruptions. 

Shri Radhelal Vyas : May I ask the hon. Member to enlighten us 
as to how the law of mongamy and divorce which is in force in Madras 
and Bombay has affected the Hindu society ? 

Mr. Chairman : May I ask the hon. Member not to lose the thread 
of his argument and not to be misled by the interruptions ? 

Pandit Malaviya : I am very grateful to you, Sir, and I assure you 
that I stand to no fear of being misled. I was saying that in all these 
States people have had no opportunity at all of knowing what this Bill 
is. It is possible for me to go into this point at great length, to go into 
the well known and universally accepted principles and methods of 
legislation and to point out the monstrous impropriety of such a state 
of things. But I believe that instead of doing that I should merely draw 
attention to that fact and hope that Government will still see how grave 
an injustice is being proposed to be done in that manner and would 
find out if they can yet undo it to some extent atleast, if not wholly. It 
cannot be possible now, if the Bill is to be proceeded with immediately — 
as the Government have declared — for it to be circulated or published 
for the information of those people. I will, therefore, not waste time in 
suggesting that procedure. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1120 


1120 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I happen to have the privilege of having by my side a sister who 
is all the time helping me by murmuring something or the other 
into my ears. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : I was pointing out that this was the best 
speech in favour of bringing in the reforms contemplated in this Bill. 

Shri Munavalli: I want to enlighten my friend over this matter 
because... 

Sardar B. S. Man : It is now the time of the hon. Member who 
is already on his legs to elighten the House. 

Pandit Maitra: The hon. Member has raised a very important 
point that the Bill was not published in the States... 

Mr. Chairman: I do not know why the hon. Member should 
advocate his cause. 

Pandit Malaviya : In view of the fact that the Bill has not been 
published in the States and is now going to be applicable to them 
also in all probability, something should be done to redress that 
glaring injustice. How it can be done would probably be best devised 
by the hon. the Law Minister. As I said, it is no use making an 
impracticable, theoretical suggestion at a stage when it is not feasible. 
I, therefore, do not say that this Bill should now be published or 
circulated for their information. But, probably, we can devise some 
other way by which that difficulty might yet be overcome, at least 
to a degree. And I would suggest for the consideration of the Law 
Minister — not as one who is opposed to the Bill necessarily, but as 
one with whom, I think, he may find himself at one on this issue — 
that the people of such a vast portion of the country should not have 
a clear and legitimate grievance of that nature. I would suggest 
to him to consider this proposition at least with respect to those 
States, if not for the rest. The amendment of which I have given 
notice and which I have moved says that this Bill should apply to 
anyone only after a referendum has been taken in the State to which 
he belongs and, in accordance with the result of that referendum, 
the Legislature of that State has decided that the Bill should apply 
thereto. I shall come to that in due course. But may I suggest 
now — whether that amendment of mine is accepted in its entirety 
or not — that the hon. the Law Minister might consider the propriety 
of providing in the Bill that at least with regard to the parts of the 
country which were then called the Indian States, where this Bill 
had not been published, this Bill should not come into force unless, 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1121 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1121 

after due publication and circulation, it has been considered in the 
Legislatures of those parts and the Legislatures have decided that 
it should apply to them. That will at least remove this glaring fault, 
the glaring omission which stares us in the face today. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : And let us have the tyranny of the 
Brahamanical society for the next thousand years ! 

Pandit Malaviya : My esteemed sister says “Let us have the 
tyranny of the Brahmanical society for the next thousand years”. 
I can only wish and pray that not for a thousand years but for 
eternity, not only my good sister but the whole world might rise to 
the level and concept of the Brahmanic ideal — the ideal which has 
always stood for fairness and justice to all, which has stood for the 
performance of duties and actions due to others rather than insistence 
upon the rights and privileges of its own, which has enjoined not a 
life of aggrandizement, not a life of self-interest, not a life of low 
thinking and low living, but a life of noble and lofty idealism and 
practical selflessness where the Brahman more than anyone else 
in society but indeed not only the Brahman but every member of 
society abnegates himself, ignores himself, allows himself to suffer 
that others may grow, may prosper and may live. I know that the 
beauty and the sublimity of that concept is lost upon some of my 
hon. friends. {Hear, hear). I hope and pray that society and mankind 
will yet be able to rise morally, socially, ethically, spiritually and 
ideologically where the Brahmana will be the true Brahmana and 
all members of society will rise to the level of that age ! I am not 
ignoring the fact that the Brahmana has deteriorated as all others 
have 

Shrimati Durgabai: In preaching and practice, both. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : Why should the lady Member interrupt ? 

Pandit Malaviya : My sister there, except that we are born of 
different parents is like a real sister to me because we have both 
been born of the same institution. That sister of mine tells me that 
the Brahmana should rise high and lofty both in precept and practice. 
I wholeheartedly and with every fibre in me pray with her that it 
may be so, and indeed that it may be so with all others as well. 

Dr. Ambedkar: In the meantime, let us have the Hindu Code. 

Pandit Malaviya : If we can rise again to that pure and noble 
Brahmanic ideal, then the Hindu society will have no more of all its 
troubles and ills but will once again become the leader of mankind 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1122 


1122 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

as it was at one time; not at the time when there was any injustice or 
tyranny by any section of society over any other but at a time when 
every member 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : Remember it. 

Pandit Malaviya : Of course I remember it, otherwise how should I say 
it. But it is Mrs. Renuka Ray who needs to know it and to remember it. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : You are talking about the Hindu society 
during the days of its decadence. Please remember the Vedas and the 
Upanishadas. 

Mr. Chairman : May I request the hon. Member to proceed with 
his argument as he was proceeding before and not to answer these 
interruptions ? Otherwise the main thread of his theme will be lost. I 
would request hon. Members not to interrupt the speaker. 

Shrimati Durgabai: May I interrupt, Sir ? Is not this Bill intended to 
bring the example of Rama to all men ? Is not that a subject matter now ? 

Mr. Chairman: This is a very clear interrruption. 

Sardar B. S. Man : It is very dangerous nowadays to ignore 
interruptions from hon. lady Members. 

Shrimati Durgabai: In the matter of interruption, there is no 
distinction between lady Members and others. 

Pandit Malaviya: In the Brahman society the woman has been given 
the highest place. There is nothing higher than the mother. 

Dr. M. M. Das : One man marrying 250 wives : Is that the dignity 
conferred on a woman ? 

Mr. Chairman: Order, order. Let the hon. Member proceed. 

Pandit Maitra: Which man has married 250 wives ? 

Dr. M. M. Das : I am referring 

Mr. Chairman : Order, order. No mutual wrangling ; we must keep 
the decorum of the House. 

Pandit Malaviya: To go back to where I was, I was therefore submitting 
that if nothing else could be done, we might at least have this measure 
made applicable to the areas which were previously called the Indian 
States. Only after that process has been gone through viz., that it has 
been published and circularised there and the Legislatures concerned 
have decided that it should apply to them. 

There is yet another difficulty which I have. And that is, that when 
the Hindu Code was first framed, according to the Constitution which 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1123 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1123 

was in force in this country at that time, agricultural property 
was not a subject on which the Central legislature legislated. As a 
result, 90 per cent, or probably even more of the landed property 
in this country did not come under its jurisdiction. 

[Mr. Deputy Speaker in the Chair ] 

Now, agricultural property has also been put in the Concurrent 
List and this legislation, if passed, will apply to landed property 
also all over the country, The scope of this Bill, therefore, has been 
expanded almost 900 times over. As it stood before, it would have 
concerned only a very small fraction of the property in the nation. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : That is no longer the subject matter of 
this Bill, unless the hon. Member thinks that as a consequence of 
the marriage, the children will be entitled to that also. 

Pandit Malaviya : I am at present talking of the application of 
the Bill and its import. I was pointing out 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member evidently was not here. 
We have said that this Bill is confined to marriage and Divorce. 
Property, inheritance, succession are not gone into now, unless 
indirectly the hon. Member says that the consequence of marriage 
will be some offspring and they may be entitled to some landed 
property. 

Pandit Malaviya : Sir, I have the same difficulty which I had 
once before. So many speakers are about that I could not hear you ! 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The property chapter and other parts are 
now excluded from the scope of the Bill. We confine ourselves to 
marriage and divorce alone. Therefore, the hon. Member need not 
dilate upon that matter now. 

Pandit Malaviya: What I was submitting was not with regard 
to the nature of the provisions in respect of property. What I 
was submitting and another point which I had tried to make 
out before you came back was with regard to some of the vary 
objectionable features and circumstances relating to the situation 
in which this Bill, is now being put before this House. And I 
was, therefore, pointing out that a very grave and fundamental 
change in the circumstances has occurred, namely, that when 
the Bill was first framed. It did not have any applicability to 
90 per cent, of the extent of this land. But it will now have, on 
account of the adoption in the Constitution of a Concurrent List 
on which agricultural lands and property have been placed 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1124 


1124 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The Bill is not pressed so far. It is now 
confined only to the part relating to marriage and divorce. There 
is enough time for hon. Members to consider when another Bill 
comes as to how it will affect agricultural land. Today we need not 
dilate upon that matter. Whatever might have been the change due 
to the agricultural lands being put in the Concurrent List, we are 
not concerned with that now. 

Pandit Malaviya : Sir, I will obey your ruling or decision. But 
I wish to submit for your consideration what I have to say and I 
will do as you will direct me. If at any time any Bill including the 
clauses relating to agricultural property comes up, then of course, 
it will be time for us to discuss the details of the clauses of that 
Bill and to express our opinions upon them. But at this stage, 
as you have stated, Sir, I am not trying to express any opinion 
whatever upon the question of the landed property in this country, 
or the methods of its disposition. I am not speaking on that subject. 
But what I wish to bring out is about the scope of the bill itself. 
Whatever may be its provisions, whether it is marriage, whether 
it is death, or whether it is anything else, it will somehow apply 
itself to all. I am trying to show with whom the provisions will 
come into compact. For instance, just before you returned to the 
Chair, I was arguing that the States in which the Bill had not 
been published should not be put under this Bill straightway, and 
there should at least be a provision that only after it has been 
published in the respective States should the respective legislatures 
be asked to decide upon it. Similarly, I beg to submit that what 
I was arguing was not the question of any landed property or 
any other property as such, but the nature of the applicability, 
the nature of the thing, what this Bill or any Bill of this nature, 
can now comprehend as against what it could comprehend before. 
Therefore, I shall confine myself to that aspect of the matter and 
not go into the question of property at all. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member has taken two hours and 
we have some other work also to do. I thought the hon. Member was 
concluding and I was anxious to call upon the hon. Law Minister 
to speak. Now, may I know how long the hon. Member is likely 
to take ? I may adjourn the half-an-hour discussion to some other 
day, if the hon. Member is likely to finish soon. We have another 
fifteen minutes left now. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1125 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1125 

Pandit Malaviya : Some of my hon. friends may laugh, Sir, but it 
is difficult for me to say how long I will take. I hope you will believe 
me,. Sir, that I have been trying not to dilate or to be expansive in my 
arguments. Some hon. friends have said that I was dilating. I can only say 
that if any one of them would do me the honour of meeting me outside 
the Chamber and letting me explain to him my view point about any 
one of the points which I am touching upon here, then he would know 
how much there is to be said on each one of these points, and how I am 
trying to confine myself only to the most essential things. Therefore 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: May I know whether it is possible for the hon. 
Member to finish in another fifteen minutes ? 

Pandit Malaviya : I do not think that will be possible. I may tell you, 
Sir, that I have got here a heap of notes and books which I have not yet 
even once touched. I am saying this in all sincerity and I am trying to 
confine myself to the most essential things. If I wanted to take up each 
one of the points in great detail, it would be different. I am trying to 
confine myself to the essentials. Yet I feel so deeply and so strongly on 
this matter and the subject is so important and vast that I am afraid it 
will not be possible for me to finish today. But I am in your hands, Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : How long does the hon. Member propose to 
take ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Five days. 

Pandit Malaviya : The Law Minister says five days : I would not 
mind five days. 

Shri Sondhi (Punjab) : The challenge is accepted. 

Shrimati Durgabai: May I suggest to my brother Member that his 
thesis may be printed and circulated and taken as read ? 

Hon. Members : No. no. 

Pandit Malaviya : When my hon. sister makes the Constitution of 
this country and also the rules of Parliament, then probably we shall 
have that procedure. 

Sardar B. S. Man : That day is not far off. 

Pandit Malaviya : I would not unnecessarily take too much time but 
I would not be able to finish today. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Let me know how long he will take from now. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1126 


1126 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar: If not five days five hours. 

Pandit Malaviya : I have lots to say, I shall be entirely guided by 
you. If you will permit me I will leave the matter open to you. I am 
prepared to come to you and show you my material and leave it to you 
as the custodian of the privileges of all Members of the House to tell 
me how much time I should take. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is not my intention to curb or curtail the 
discussion on any point. Two hours have already been taken by the hon. 
Member and already we have discussed for six days. So far as the books 
and other references that the hon. Member has mentioned, they are for 
detailed consideration and he will not lose his opportunity. There are 
the other clauses on which he may bring to bear his knowledge of those 
tracts which he has. So far as the present occasion is concerned half an 
hour more should be sufficient to the hon. Member. 

Pandit Malaviya : I fear that may not suffice. If you will permit 
me I will put it in another way; I shall try to be as brief as possible. 
If you would rather that I cut short as much as possible I will devote 
myself to two points, namely marriage and divorce tomorrow and finish 
as quickly as I can. It may be that I will need. . . . 

Dr. Ambedkar : Five hours. 

Pandit Malaviya : He has come down to five hours from five days. 
Do you think, Sir, that is unreasonable? I shall try to make it as much 
less as possible. I am not saying this lightly. I will earnestly endeavour 
to make it as short as possible, perhaps two to two and a half hours. 

Shrimati Renuka Ray : I want to ask a question, Sir. This clause 2 
deals with applicability. I want to ask you again whether we can bring 
up the whole subject of marriage and divorce when the consideration 
stage is over. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The hon. Member wants my ruling again and 
again. I wish only to say, is it necessary at the end of the discussion to 
give a ruling? Anyhow this much is clear. The hon. Member will try to 
conclude as early as possible tomorrow. So far as this matter is concerned 
and after he concludes I will immediately take up the half-hour discussion 
now and we shall go on till 1-30. I thought the hon. Member, Pandit 
Malaviya might conclude if we sat for another half an hour today, but 
there does not appear to be any chance of that. Therefore, if he will take 
some more time tomorrow, immediately after him I propose calling the 
Hon. Law Minister. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1127 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1127 

Shri B. Das (Orissa): Sir, the reformists are keeping very quiet 
on the floor of this House. Two violent though very outstanding 
speeches have been made by my friends, Sardar Man and Pandit 
Malaviya. Therefore, you will permit us who are the majority in this 
House to have a say, apart from what Dr. Ambedkar will have to 
say in his final reply on behalf of Government. 

Hon. Members : Yes, Sir. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Yes, Sir, the father of the House 
should be given a chance. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai (Uttar Pradesh): Sir, we have amendments 
on which we want to speak. 

Khwaja Inait Ullah (Bihar): Sir, so many amendments have 
been moved regarding this clause so as to bring within the scope 
all Indians, and so much has been said on that point. Therefore, I 
wish to throw some light on the Muslim point of view, as to whether 
they can accept it or not. So I must have some time. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri: May I respectfully point out that yesterday 
when I raised this question of opposition to an amendment, you 
were pleased to say that such opposition would be allowed. And I 
particularly laid stress on the amendment by which the Hon. Dr. 
Ambedkar wants to introduce “tribe”, which is a very important 
matter. I want to speak on that — I am not going to speak on other 
subjects. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Merely because an hon. Member tables an 
amendment he is not entitled to speak. I am allowing all elucidation 
on points to those who have tabled amendments, but when similar 
amendments have been tabled and one or two hon. Members have 
spoken, on account of the time which is already taken, if some hon. 
Members who have tabled amendments are not able to speak, I do 
not think I need wait so far as this matter is concerned. We are 
having a second reading on this clause 2. As regards the request 
of my hon. friend, Khwaja Inait Ullah, I am seriously considering 
whether that amendment which wants to apply this Bill to Muslims 
and Christians is not enlarging the scope of the Bill. I do not think 
any further discussion on this matter is necessary. Anyhow, I am 
going to call the hon. Minister immediately after Pandit Malaviya. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri: I wanted to oppose Dr. Ambedkar’s 
amendment relating to the introduction of the word “tribe”. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1128 


1128 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : With regard to what has fallen from you, 
Sir, about the admissibility of the amendment seeking to enlarge 
the applicability, may I submit that even at an earlier stage this 
point was taken up and then we were assured by the hon. Speaker 
that before any ruling was given on that point we would be given an 
opportunity to have our say on the matter. It might be the Chair’s 
first impression that it may not perhaps be within the scope, but 
you will please permit us to have a say to convince you how easily 
it comes within the scope. If that be your ruling I may submit many 
of the amendments of my hon. friend, Dr. Ambedkar would also have 
to be declared out of scope. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Dr. Ambedkar himself to be ruled out of 
this House? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Not he, some of his amendments; because 
they are very much on the same lines as this amendment. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : One wrong amendment does not make 
another amendment good. If any of the hon. Law Minister’s 
amendments also enlarges the scope it is out of order — we will 
consider that matter. 

Pandit Malaviya : I have another amendment of which I have 
given notice — a short amendment which I shall move tomorrow at 
the end of my speech. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Provided, it is an absolutely formal 
amendment. 

Pandit Malaviya : I gave notice of it day before yesterday. 

Khwaja Inait Ullah: I will not take more than a few minutes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: No, Sir. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhuri: What about my point, Sir? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member has got the ‘Ayes’ lobby 
and the ‘Noes’ lobby. He can vote against the clause if he likes. 

It is now too late for us to embark upon the half-an-hour discussion. 
It will be taken up on some other day. 

The House then adjourned till Half Past Eight of the Clock on 
Thursday, the 20th September, 1951. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1129 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1129 

* HINDU CODE — contd. 

Shri Amolakh Chand (Uttar Pradesh): May I draw your attention 
Sir, before Pandit Malaviya resumes his speech, about a cartoon which 
appeared in today’s Indian News Chronicle, about which I have sent 
a note to you ? May I know whether that will be taken up just now 
or on some other date ? 

Hon. Members : What is the subject matter of the cartoon ? 

Shri Amolakh Chand : May I, with the permission of the Chair, 
just satisfy the curiosity of hon. Members about this cartoon ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I have received this cartoon published in the 
Indian News Chronicle. I think it shows my likeness. It is a cartoon 
of a clock where both the hands are being held up by some of the 
hon. Members who have spoken against this Bill, but underneath 
the very pendulum is said to be held intact, not moving forward or 
backward, by a representation of myself. So long as the speaker is 
here that is another matter. But casting aspersions on the Chair is 
not only unjustified and undignified but here it is also opposed to the 
facts. I do not know if any hon. Member will ever raise any point 
that whatever might be my differences I have done anything unjust 
in this House. 

Hon. Members: No, no. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Therefore, I will look into this matter. It is 
a very serious matter — it does not matter whosoever may be in the 
Chair — to cast aspersions on the Chair. The moment the House feels 
that the person who occupies the Chair for the time being is not doing 
justice, it knows what to do, so far as that person is concerned. But it 
is not for outsiders to caricature, and it is an aspersion on the whole 
House. I shall look into this matter leisurely and then find out what 
action should be taken. However, I do not want this to interrupt the 
progress of this Bill. 

Shri T. N. Singh (Uttar Pradesh): At the same time, whatever 
the action about that particular cartoon be, we do feel that the Press 
should not come out with anything which casts aspersions on the 
Chair of this august House, and it should be prevented. I feel that 
the matter, since it has been raised, is rather important and it should 
not be postponed in this fashion, I would urge that once the matter 
has been raised, we should certainly take it up right now and the 
House should express its disapproval. 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 20th September 1951, pp. 2901-19 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1130 

1130 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I shall take time to consider it. 

*Pandit Malaviya (Uttar Pradesh): When I left off yesterday, you 
were good enough to ask me how much more time I would need. I 
respectfully expressed my inability to indicate any exact amount of 
time and requested you to let me proceed on the basis that I should 
try to take as little time as may be possible. You were good enough to 
more or less indicate a limit, that I should not take more than about 
27 0 hours more. 

Shri Sidhva (Madhya Pradesh): You said half an hour, Sir. 

Pandit Malaviya: I have since heard 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I can only make one observation. The hon. 
Member yesterday was encouraged to ask for five days on the suggestion 
humorously made by the Hon. Law Minister. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): He wanted five days — I 
suggested five hours. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: When I was asking how long the hon. Member 
was likely to take, the Hon. Law Minister humorously said, five days. 
I was suggesting half an hour, the hon. Member was wanting more. 
Now what I propose doing is this 

Pandit Malaviya: May I say 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I will do sufficient justice to the hon. Member. 
Now how long, may I know, is the Hon. Law Minister likely to take 
to reply ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is my intention to be brief, but I would like to 
cover some of the points raised, and I feel an hour or an hour and a 
quarter might be more than enough for me. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I propose calling the Hon. Law Minister as 
soon as the hon. Member who is on his legs finishes. Even if he takes 
2 1 /,, hours, there will be sufficient time if I call the Hon. Law Minister 
at 12 o’clock. 

Shrimati Durgabai (Madras): The hon. Member who is on his legs 
after having mentioned five hours or five minutes or whatever it may 
be, said that he would submit himself to the ruling of the Chair and 
you very kindly said that he should not require more than half an 
hour. After having once submitted to the ruling of the Chair, would 
the hon. Member be now permitted to retract ? 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 20th September 1951, pp. 2902-18. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1131 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1131 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I leave it to hon. Members themselves. 

Pandit Malaviya : I said about another matter yesterday that when 
my sister makes the rules, we will have to submit to many things from 
which fortunately we are free at the moment. 

Shrimati Durgabai: This is already in the rules. 

Pandit Malaviya: What I was intending to say was 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Under the rules, so far as Finance Bills are 
concerned, I can set a limit. With respect to other Bills there is no 
provision for setting a time-limit on speeches. 

Shrimati Durgabai: My point is that once the Chair has given its 
ruling 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Not ruling. 

Shrimati Durgabai: would the hon. Member be permitted to go 

against that ruling ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: It is not to be interpreted to be a ruling. It 
is only a suggestion. 

Incidentally, I forgot that I will have to put the amendments to the 
vote of the House. Therefore, if the hon. Member would restrict himself 
to two hours, thus making half an hour available for the Chair, I shall 
call upon the Hon. Law Minister at 11-30 so that we may finish this 
clause and all the amendments on it before we rise for the day. The 
hon. Member may take two hours. 

Pandit Malaviya : I am very grateful to you, Sir, for what you have 
said, but what I was going to say in the beginning was that whatever 
might have been the arrangement that we had more or less thought we 
had arrived at 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: He need not labour that point. 

Pandit Malaviya: since then some esteemed friends, for whose 

views and opinions most of us in this House have respect and regard, have 
taken the view that Members of the House should take as little time as 
possible. As I came into the House just now, it was conveyed to me that I 
should finish within a matter of minutes. I know that according to the rules 
one should have the time which he wishes to have and it is very good of you 
to say that you will stick to that. It is also true that I feel very earnestly 
that in a matter of such vital importance where things which have come 
down from millennia are going to be demolished, minutes and hours should 
not be counted and if somebody has something to say on this issue which 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1132 


1132 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is obviously not utter nonsense and irrelevance, then the question 
of time should not arise, whether he takes one day or two days or 
twenty days. But I respect the wishes of elders and of our leader 
and what I wished to say to you was that even though you have 
been good enough according to the rules to give me the longer 
opportunity. I shall try to leave out almost all that I had to say 
and shall try to confine myself to a few minutes only. I say this 
with a deep sense of pain and injustice to me and to this cause, 
but I am a man, as I said, who believes in the Hindu methods of 
tolerance and even if an unreasonable thing is thrust on me 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The hon. Member will kindly resume his 
seat. I have been trying to avoid any impression being created that 
we are either hustling the Bill or unnecessarily dragging it on. I 
am bound to see to it that neither the one impression nor the other 
impression is created. We have spent sufficient time over this matter 
and just when we are concluding the debate and when, if a closure 
motion is moved. I am prepared to accept it because I am satisfied 
that there has been sufficient discussion on this matter and although 
individual Members might not have spoken, collectively all of them 
have spoken on all the points arising — just at this time, if the hon. 
Member feels aggrieved and then makes a point that for want of 
time and on account of some kind of limitation and pressure he is 
not putting forth all his points, he would not be doing justice to 
any of the persons here. I would like to avoid an impression being 
created that we are hustling this measure. It may be that there 
may not be sufficient support for the one or the other opinion. 
After all, we have to go by the rule of the majority in this House 
and it is open to all persons to express and press their point of 
view, but let it not be said that we are hustling the measure. The 
hon. Member has taken two hours. If he wants, he may have two 
more hours and if for any reason he is not prepared to proceed 
further, he need not make a point out of it, lest it should create 
an impression that we are hustling through this matter, though 
really we have been going on leisurely with it. Therefore, that kind 
of impression ought not to be created. It is open to him to speak 
or not to speak for various other reasons, which are extraneous. I 
am only concerned with the procedure in this House and the right 
impression both in this House and outside that we are not hustling 
such an important matter as this nor are we unnecessarily trying 
to stretch the discussion by any kind of filibustering. Therefore, 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1133 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1133 

in between these two impressions, I am trying to carry through 
this bill. The hon. Member need not refer to all those matters. It 
is his sweet will and pleasure to say what he wants to say or to 
refer to the further clauses or not to refer to any of them at all, or 
to make any comments for various reasons which he may consider 
fit and proper. 

Pandit Malaviya : I entirely agree with the remarks that have 
fallen from your lips and I was not making a complaint. I was only 
mentioning the fact that for reasons other than those that you have 
stated I shall not allow myself to take all the time that I need and 
that I should have liked to take. That is all that I wished to submit. 
Incidentally, it will also probably enable several other Members 
of this House, who, I saw yesterday, were very keen to have an 
opportunity to say something, to have an opportunity to do so. I am 
not saying this by way of any complaint, but I was submitting to 
you as a matter of fact that I have to leave out practically all that 
I wished to say and must now come straight to one or two points. 

I will leave the point I was making when we dispersed yesterday, 
regarding the scope of the Bill having been extended, so to say, 
overnight by the new Constitution having included agricultural 
lands in the Current List. I shall leave that also there. 

I will only touch in passing on another very important aspect, 
namely, that the bill which is before us now is so largely changed 
that it is almost unrecognisable compared to what it was when it 
was first introduced. There is a rule that Select Committees at the 
end of their reports should state that they have amended the Bill 
only in such measure, as they think, has not changed it materially 
and that the amended Bill does not need re-circulation or re- 
publication. That proves the principle that if a Bill is substantially 
changed in a Select Committee it should be republished and 
re-circulated. I submit that in matters of legislation we should 
observe the sanctity of the rules, because rules are framed in 
moments of calm and dispassionate consideration ; not vis-a-vis 
any particular item or any particular point of view, but with 
regard to the basic fundamental needs of ensuring that legislation 
is passed only with due care, thought and circumspection. Such 
rules, therefore, have very great value and it must be an ill day 
for the growth of healthy parliamentary traditions and institutions 
in any country if we begin to make light of them to suit the 
conveniences of our opinions on particular issues and particular 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1134 


1134 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

occasions. I, therefore, feel, now that the Bill is so entirely changed to as 
it is, that constitutionally there can be no justification at all for proceeding 
with it, or any part of it now as it stands without that procedure being 
brought into force. I will leave that point also there. 

I will touch only upon one or two things more and will resume my 
seat. Several friends who are supporters of this Bill said that this Bill 
has been drawn up in accordance with the tenets of the Smritis and 
Dharma Shastras. If I had the time I would have quoted extracts from 
the various Smritis and Dharma Shastras to prove the hollowness of 
that claim. I cannot do that now. I will, therefore, come straight to the 
two vital principles which are involved in the measure that is to be 
taken up — one the question of the degree of sapinda prohibition and 
second the question as to whether among the Hindus a remarriage of 
and married woman can take place. 

Texts have been quoted form some of the Smritis on both these points. 
With regard to the sapinda question it has been argued that the Smritis 
have from time to time laid down different principles, that while one 
Smriti has said one thing another Smriti has said another thing and 
an attempt has been made to draw the inference therefrom that it was 
a matter not of such vital importance that it could not change, but that 
from time to time, reflecting the opinion and the practice of the age, 
the different Smritis have laid down different texts. 1 was mentioning 
yesterday that in the matter of these Dharma Shastras there are rules 
of interpretation which have laid down cut and clear principles and 
methods of approach. It is laid down that the Dharma Shastra can be 
interpreted only by the utilisation of the rules of Mimamsa. Fourteen 
sources for determining them have to be utilized. They are all mentioned 
and therefore if anybody wants honestly to understand these things he 
must go into the depth of that matter. 

Almost every one of the Smritis and the Dharma Shastras have laid 
down that in the sapinda degree of prohibition we should have seven 
degrees on the paternal side and five degrees on the maternal side or 
more. Nobody has disputed that. It has been said that it is stated only 
in some of the Smritis as five and three instead of seven and five. I 
believe the Paithinasi Smriti text is relied upon for this purpose. In the 
belief that Members of this House wish seriously to take the matter into 
consideration as to whether it is laid down in the Smriti that it should 
be five and three, I shall try to clear up that point. The Paithinasi 
Smriti 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1135 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1135 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I do not think the Hon. Law Minister is 
dogmatic about this matter. 

Dr. Ambedkar: When the time comes we shall consider it. ... 

Pandit Malaviya : I am taking this only as an instance to show how 
the entire provisions of the Bill are based upon a complete misconception. 
The text in the Paithinasi Smriti is : 

Whf TThPT: OWM! fq<TcT: 

So far it is clear — five degrees from the mother and seven degrees 
from the father. So, the Paithinasi Smriti also says the same so far. 
Then, it goes on to say: 

Hiqn: h-oiRiddl I 

It gives another view and says three from the mother’s side and five 
from the father’s side. If I had the time I would have gone into all the 
other Smritis to disprove the statement of some friends that the Smritis 
lay down different rules — in one case seven and five and in another case 
five and three and it is for us to select. 

The Mimamsa lays down the method of interpretation of these texts. 
The whole basis of Hindu law rests upon the fact that the law comes 
for the Shruti. Shrutis are Swatah Pramana H H I u I :) . Whatever is 

in the Shruti stands proved by itself and does not need any further 
argument. The Smritis are Partah Parmana TxT: TPTbT: They do not by 
themselves carry that authority because they are Shrutimula. 

They belong to the class where authority is derived from Shrutis. Now, 
it is obvious then that if the same source is to be drawn upon by all 
the Smritis the obvious objection would be — and I suppose it would be 
a natural objection also — that if you claim that they all emanate from 
one and the same source, then how can there be conflicting versions in 
them. We can anticipate that objection. 

Mimamsa goes on to say that there may be cases where in the Shruti 
itself there is auvikalp, that is, where the Shruti itself lays down two 
alternatives that a thing may be of one or another. 

There are instances of that nature in the Shrutis themselves ! 

[10 A.M.] 

dfcri Tptfin 34 '1_r« ri Ml s $i Hi I 

That is from the Smritis. It says a certain Yajnya may be performed 
before sunrise, and it also says it may be performed after sunrise. 
But there is no conflict, because both are mentioned in the Shruti. 
And then according to the tenets of the Mimamsa Shastra other 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1136 


1136 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

considerations come into play. Technically it is called Atma tushti, and 
according to the principle of Atma tushti each one has to decide — not for 
the pleasure of it; Atma tushti does not mean pleasure, it does not mean 
one’s whim of taking one thing today and taking another thing tomorrow, 
taking rice today and taking chapati tomorrow. But atma tushti has a 
fundamental religious place. According to Atma tushti the Dharma has 
to be selected, and once it is selected it remains permanently there, for 
all time. But that is so only when both the things are mentioned in the 
Shruti. The vikalp comes only when both the things are thus mentioned 
in the Shruti. For instance you find : 

3Tftrrnr I HifrHiil TnfftTT I 

(Late at night takes one of sixteen, takes not late at night.) 

Two directly conflicting things in the Shruti. But both being there, 
the vikalp is possible. If the Smritis say two different things, then if we 
found that there is mention of the two things in the Shrutis, the vikalp 
would be possible, and the claim which has been made by my Hon. Friend 
the Law Minister and others that these provisions are based upon what 
the Shrutis say, would become correct. But the available Shrutis are 
silent on the point. There is no direction about the matter. The question 
then arises, how then do the Smritis contain different rules if they have 
derived them from the Shruti sources ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I understand the Bill to go according to the 
Shrutis if possible and without the Smritis if necessary. That is what, 
I think, the Law Minister has in view. Therefore, notwithstanding the 
doubt as to whether it is three and five according to strict rules of 
interpretation — and they have to be made consistent; I do not think 
he disputes the proposition that everywhere they are trying to make it 
consistent so as to avoid any inconsistency — he chooses the latter view. 
Even if it is not borne out by the strict rules of interpretation he says 
that it is the correct one and should be adopted, subject of course to 
the approval of the House. I think that is the view of the Law Minister. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Therefore, there is no good labouring the point 
as to what the interpretation is. 

Pandit Malaviya : As I said, I am not doing this necessarily to go 
into the interpretation of this thing. I am taking this as an example to 
show the approach to the matter. What I wish to say is that according 
to the Mimamsa Shastra the two texts, one saying that it should be 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1137 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1137 

five and seven and the second saying that it may be three and five, 
must be reconciled and an interpretation — an infallible, unquestionable 
interpretation must be there. An interpretation has to be found which 
is unquestionable and incontroverible. Otherwise the Smriti does not 
remain a Smriti. Paithinisi is among the Smritis. If we will only look 
for it we will find that we have in the Smriti Sangrah, we have in the 
Nibandhakaras a clear interpretation of this difference which lays down, 
and not only lays down but proves — it will take me time if I went into it, 
therefore I will not — but it is proved that this provision in the Paithinisi 
is not applicable to all people, it is not applicable to the aurasa and the 
others. In their case the seven and the five apply, and this variant of 
five and three can only apply to Dattaka putras or to Sapatni matas. 
That is how the Mimamsa Shastra reconciles these two. 

I took this instance to show that there is a clear way of interpreting 
the Shastras. If we want to go according to the Shastras we must go 
accordingly and we will find no sanction for deviating from the seven 
and the five degrees of Sapinda prohibition for marriage. 

Similarly, I will take another question. A member read out with a 
certain amount of righteous satisfaction and vehemence that in the 
Smritis themselves we have provisions for the marriage of once-married 
women. The well-known Narada Smriti and Parashara text was read 
out by an hon. friend of mine — here he is — and he said that the Smritis 
themselves have said that a woman may be married a second time. I 
can see some friends feeling satisfied about it. This is a tragic matter, 
for this reason that the meaning of that sloka becomes perverted if it is 
interpreted to mean that it relates to a married couple. I hope Members 
will not think that I am talking in the air. (An Hon. Member: No, no 
). The line is very simple: 

nidrl 'hcftl 

dl hull', ferSTta^l 

It is allowed at disappearance, demise, reclusion, impotency and 
sinfulness of the husband. 

As it looks it is very simple. In the case of these and these and these 
‘husbands’, these friends think, another husband is provided. But I wish 
Members of the House kindly to devote their mind to this. The simple 
rules of Vyakarana come into this question. 

An hon. friend says Vyakarna Padhao and one may feel tempted 
to play the pedagogue to so distinguished a class, but I shall resist 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1138 


1138 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the temptation and I will only briefly explain the matter because 
it is a point upon which the whole edifice of the Hindu Code rests. 
It is that one sentence upon which everyone seems to be taking his 
stand. It is a very simple matter. According to the rules of grammar 
Eka Vachana in Saptami of Pati is Patyau. That is formed according 
to definite Sutras. I do not know if you will let me go into details to 
show how the words Patyau and Patau are each formed. I am quite 
sure it will be interesting, but it will take time. But every thing will 
become clear if we understand that. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: What will happen to Hari ? It is a 
masculine ? 

Pandit Malaviya: I see, Sir, you are interested and if you will 
permit me... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Then Hari is Ikaranta Pullingam and 
Saptami is Harau and Pati should be patau. That is my difficulty. 
I do not know if it is different. 

Pandit Malaviya : Sir, your question is quite valid. That is it. 
From Hari it is Harau. So from Pati, it should be Patau. But we 
all know it is Patyau. Why ? The difference is in this way. When it 
is Saptami Ek Vachan Gni comes in. Then the Sutra Patih Samasa 
Eva comes into play and the Ghi Sangya gets ruled out and another 
Sutra aut, comes into play and it becomes pati plus au. Then by 
the Sutra Ikoyanachi the ‘V gets transformed into ya and Patyau is 
formed. That is in the case of the ordinary meaning of the word Pati, 
that is husband. The rule is quite clearly laid down Patih Samasa 
Eva. Now, Sir, the question arises why instead of Patyau the word 
Patau has been used. It is such an obvious thing that even a blind 
man can see, that there is some difference, there is some purpose. 
The Hon. Law Minister will bear me out that the normal form 
(rup) of Pati in Saptami is Patyau. But in this text Patau is used. 
( Interruption ) An hon. Member says that he is extremely doubtful. 
I do not claim for myself his wisdom in this. But, Panini’s Ashta 
Dhyayi is there and if any hon. Member can point out anything to 
the contrary. I will do whatever he will say. 

Shri Amolakh Chand : Will the hon. Member quote the shloka 
also? 

Pandit Malaviya : I am coming to that. Therefore, the word used 
is different from the normal word Patyau. Here the word is Patau. 
Now according to the rules of Sanskrit grammer... 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1139 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1139 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is not necessary. The hon. Member means 
that it is incorrect. 

Pandit Malaviya : No, no. It is not incorrect. What I was going to 
point out was that in this case the word Pati is used not in the sense 
of Pati meaning husband but according to the rules of grammar — I am 
not saying it on my own but according to the rules of grammar Hdl can 
only be used where the Achararthe sense comes in. Then, not being in 
the sense of x rf?T i.e. husband, the sutra Ix rf%: TbTRT which applies 
normally and results in does not apply and ‘Ghi’ Sangya (‘fb WT ) 
takes place etc. and when ‘Ghi’ Sangya ( fb W1 ) comes in then the 
sutra Accha Gheh ( ^:l ) applies and the word Pati plus ‘i’ becomes 
Pata plus Au’; and by the rule Vriddhi it becomes Patau (Tit). It is a 
recognized word in the Sanskrit Grammar of Panini; it is not mistake 
that it has been used here in that form ; it is not by thoughtlessness 
that it has come in. But the word Patau ( Tft ) instead of Patyau 
has a meaning and the meaning of that word Tdf is one who is going to 
be a Pati and not one who is a Pati. That is the meaning of that word. 
Let anybody challenge what I am stating. For thousands of years that 
grammar has been there and nobody has questioned it; the word Patau 
means not a husband but who is on the point of becoming a husband. 
This correct meaning of this shloka completely changes... 

Prof. K. T. Shah (Bihar): Anayu comes in there. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Patranyo Vidheeyate comes in. It must have 
been a husband. 

Pandit Malaviya : I am coming to that. I am very glad you raised 
that question. In the Prathama there are only one set of sutras but in 
Saptami there are these two sets of sutras mentioned by me, one forming 
patyau and another forming Patau and secondly the difference had to be 
shown at the first place only, to clearly indicate that only where there 
had been a talk of marriage but no marriage in fact, that this question 
arose, while in the second place, it is a husband who is to be indicated. 
It is not merely a candidate for husbandship which has to be provided. 
Therefore, the second Patiranyo Vidheeyate is perfectly correct. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Anyo must mean what preceded also. 

Pandit Malaviya : Anyo is again Prathama. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Prathamanyah also must be the husband. 

Pandit Malaviya: If it had been both the same then in the first 
place it would have Patyau. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1140 


1140 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Whatever is intended by the provisions one 
must correspond with the other one. 

Pandit Malaviya : How can it, Sir, when the very purpose is different. 
The beauty of Sanskrit language is that it expresses in a word what 
it takes a sentence to say in another language. That is the beauty of 
Sanskrit language. If a sentence says “If mango is not available, then 
guavas may be taken” we cannot say that mango and guava must be 
one and the same. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There cannot be a comparison between two 
absolutely uncorrelated matters. If Anyo is used that word or the other 
must relate to the same category. If in the one case it is not marriage, 
in the other case also it is not marriage. If it is marriage in one case, 
it is marriage in another case. Both of them are understood to be the 
marriage of the husband. 

Pandit Malaviya : We cannot change the meaning of words 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha (Bihar): On a point of order, Sir, I find that all 
these discussions are academic. The words Pati and Patyau are used in 
this shloka and not Patau. 

Pandit Malaviya: That must be a wrong print. I am not saying it 
lightheartedly. The original test is Patau. The very chauda 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Patite Patyau must be wrong because it should 
be guru. The prosody will come in the way of this Pati and Patau are 
different. Apparently it is wrong. 

Pandit Malaviya: It is obvious that it cannot be Patyau. What I 
wished to submit was that this rock upon which that edifice stands 
does not exist at all and the meaning of the word used is not husband ; 
it is not Patyau but it is only one who is on the point of becoming a 
husband, Patau. There is thus nothing in the Shastras to suggest that 
a married Hindu woman could marry again. 

I do not want to take much time of the House. I had many things to 
say. But, in view of what I referred to, I do not wish to go against the 
wishes of those whose wishes and words are law for us. I, therefore, do 
not wish to take much more time, much though I would have liked to say 
many things. By these two examples I have tried to show how completely 
fallacious are the grounds on which the Hindu Code is proceeding. 

I will conclude by mentioning one thing more. In Hindu society 
from time immemorial, laws have prevailed without the authority of 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1141 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1141 

the State, without the authority of the police, without the authority 
of any legislature as such. There has been no governmental 
sanction behind the laws which have been in force. The laws were 
promulgated by men who had attained to perfection as nearly as 
man could, who were held in universal respect, who worked for 
the good of the people. And there was the sanction of what has 
been called in the Shastras, Apoorva, the unseen, that which will 
happen under certain circumstances ; the thought that what one 
was doing today would have effect later on ; that the human soul, 
the jeeva does not lead one life alone, but goes through a chain of 
births; that the actions of one life are inter-related to the actions 
and results of previous and future lives ; that deeds of virtue 
and piety and righteousness bring a reward which is greater in 
reality than any reward of comfort or convenience which one may 
have in this life. A clear conception of the real value of things as 
distinguished from the ephemeral aspect, was always kept in mind, 
it is under the force of that sanction and that belief that the laws 
which were promulgated have always been followed. In the whole 
of this country, throughout its length and breadth, the law of the 
Hindus has been observed not because any one — for instance my 
esteemed friend Kaka Saheb Gadgil who is coming into the House 
and who talked on this Code, not like the elderly responsible man 
that we know him to be, but like a gay youngster who just utters 
what comes at that moment in the mouth, or any one else — found 
them to be comfortable or otherwise, found them to be pleasant 
or irksome, but because both Kaka Saheb and Govind Malaviya 
and the other 300 millions like them have been steeped in the 
conviction and belief that what they are doing today will have 
repercussions hereafter, that what they go through now will bring 
its own reward. They have been all bred up to believe that it is 
not Preya alone which matters in life, but that it is the Shreya of 
things which must be assiduously inculcated. That has been the 
shape of things in this country and in this society. Let not the 
Government make a thoughtless and hasty mistake in demolishing 
that fabric upon which the respect for and the adherence to the 
law has prevailed. If one set of legislators, one set of wise men or 
wiseacres today legislate in one particular manner as they think 
fit, people will have ceased to worry about Apoorva. People will 
know that it is possible for them the next day to get a law made 
to suit their pleasure and their convenience. The moral fabric 
will disappear and man might go back to the old age where there 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1142 


1142 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

was no method or system of marriages, where a state of things 
prevailed which probably, in decent society, would not be considered 
worth mentioning. That is the stake which is involved. 

I should have liked to have dealt with the question of divorce ; 
I should have, liked to have dealt with the question of widow 
remarriage; I should have liked to have dealt with the question of 
inter-caste marriage; I should have liked to have dealt with the 
question of monogamy. I hope I will have opportunities as these 
clauses come up to deal with each one of these at the appropriate 
time. It is not for reasons of orthodoxy alone that this question must 
be considered. It is from the point of view of the over all interest 
and well-being of society that we should tackle these problems. I said 
society. Society means the whole group of people, all the inhabitants 
taken together. It is formed of the units, of the individuals. But, the 
unit and the whole, even though they are inseparably interdependent, 
have their own separate entity also. The body is made up of all the 
limbs. But, the hand has its own existence by itself; the head has 
its own. The body as a whole cannot be by itself without the hands, 
feet, legs and the head. 

[Shrimati Durgabai in the Chair ] 

But, the body is not merely the hand or the feet or the head. It 
is the sum total of the whole. When, therefore, we have to think 
of society, we have to think of the good and interest of society as 
a whole and if any thing is in the interest and well-being of all, 
then, whether it is pleasant or whether it is a little less pleasant for 
one individual here or one individual there, that must be adopted. 
When these topics come up, I hope I shall have opportunities to 
deal with them. I wished to say a great deal to bring out in clear 
perspective the issues involved, the fallacy or correctness of the 
approach made, and the conclusion to which we must irresistibly 
be driven. And right now, Madam, I should have had another 
advantage, that one esteemed Member of this House, in the very 
nature of things, being in the Chair, is now bound to be as fair to 
me as anybody else. But I said that I shall not take more time, and 
shall respect the wishes and the decisions of the esteemed Leader 
of this House. I will therefore close my speech, and close it with 
the earnest appeal that a matter of this seriousness, affecting the 
life of 300 million human beings should be considered as carefully 
and in as great a detail as may be humanly possible. There is 
only one formal thing which I must do now and that is to move 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1143 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1143 

the amendments of which I had given notice three days ago. I beg 
to move : 

(i) In part (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, after “including” insert 
“Buddhists, Jains, Sikhs”. 

(ii) Omit part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2. 

After the first amendment, the clause will read as follows : 

“to all Hindus, that is to say, to all persons professing the Hindu 

religion in any of its forms or developments, including Buddhists, 

Jains, Sikhs, Virashaivas or Lingayats and member of the Brahmo, 

the Prarthana etc. etc.” 

I have moved this amendment for a simple reason. I hope and 
pray that I am a devout Hindu — I do not know if I can make that 
claim — and 

Dr. Ambedkar: After such a speech who else can make that claim ? 

Pandit Malaviya : And in the Sankalpa which we perform on all 
occasions, we say Bauddhavatare. If only I had the time, I would have 
tried to show that Buddhism, Jainism, Sikhism etc., while they have 
their own independent place and position, cannot, by any stretch of 
imagination, be treated as outside the pale of Hinduism. That does 
not mean that Hinduism lays any claim upon them or wishes in any 
way to restrict their complete independence and separate existence. 
It is not that. I am talking of the historical relation. They have all 
sprung out of it and have always formed part of it. Even in their 
religious books and procedure, even in their daily practices and daily 
life, there are any number of points of identical similarity which 
still persist. In this land there should be no need, therefore, to show 
them separately. My amendment does not make any difference in 
the result. The clause instead of coming as a separate clause comes 
within the previous one. 

I have now only to make an appeal to the Members of this House to 
view this matter dispassionately. As I said, I do not deny that there 
are some people who feel that it will be good for society if such a law 
is enacted. My appeal to them is to proceed in the right manner about 
it. Sometime ago there was the Inter-caste Marriage Act which was 
passed, making inter-caste marriages among Arya Samajists valid. 
At that very time Dr. Bhagwan Dasji, that great learned scholar and 
devotee of Manu, brought before the then Central Assembly, a Bill 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1144 


1144 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

for the application of that clause to the whole body of Hindus. That 
Bill was not proceeded with, and after long and careful discussion 
it was dropped. Inter-caste marriages among Arya Samajists had 
gone on for some decades and they had carried on their movement 
for a long time and when the same had become common and the 
time came the measure was adopted. Let us take a leaf out of that 
book. If social reforms have to be made, nobody can object to them, 
if all those who are concerned should desire to have them. Let us, 
therefore, adopt that course, if for nothing else, so that what you 
do may not remain a mere dead letter on paper without any effect 
whatsoever. 

It has also been pointed out that because now we are only taking 
up the parts of the Code relating to marriage and divorce, we should 
consider the feasibility of making an All-India All- Community Code 
towards that end. I am not one of those whose argument is that if 
monogamy is good and is to be enforced for the Hindus, it should 
necessarily apply to everybody. I do not say that at all. If monogamy 
is good, then I want it for the Hindus whether it is applied to anybody 
else or not. I do not want to argue that if the rule of monogamy is 
good for the Hindus it should not come to them unless it comes for 
everybody else. That is for the others to decide and if they do not 
want it, let them not have it but if it is good for the Hindus let it 
come to them. (An hon. Member: Is it good ?) It is good and I think 
it is the only good thing ; but that, however, does not mean that we 
should become blind to the requirements of a good thing in itself 
or that we should not take other relevant facts and aspects into 
consideration. So far as the principle of monogamy goes I have no 
objection to it, Nobody can have any objection to it, and I should be 
unhappy if anything except monogamy is found in practice anywhere... 

Giani G. S. Musafir (Punjab) : There is no harm in asking for 
all a thing which is good in itself. 

Pandit Malaviya : I do not say that it should not apply to every 
body ; it is for the Government and for the others to think about 
the others. They have now brought forward a restricted measure 
dealing with only marriage and divorce and if they think that it 
is right to apply it to the whole country, let them do it. That is 
another consideration which the Government should certainly take 
into account. 

Shri Bhatt (Bombay) : But can we Members not ask the Government 
that we wish it should be made applicable to all ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1145 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1145 

Pandit Malaviya: Certainly. Many people have said it. 

Giani G. S. Musaflr: I think it is our duty to ask for it. 

Pandit Malaviya: It is an important point which, I hope, the 
Government will consider. 

Mr. Chairman : May I ask the hon. Member if he does not consider 
it desirable that we should practise it before we preach to the others 
and would we not then have a better or stronger case ? 

Pandit Malaviya: Madam, I do not want to be so impertinent as to 
argue with the Chair. I will only close now by repeating my appeal that 
Members of this House will rise to the requirements of the position of 
responsibility which they occupy and will deal with this measure with 
that sense of gravity which it deserves, so that the immemorial and 
hoary traditions and foundations of the life of the Hindu community 
may not be tampered with or destroyed in a lighthearted or profane 
manner. 

Shri Jajoo (Madhya Bharat): Madam, the question be now put. 
( Interruptions ). 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh (Bihar): I want to speak, Madam. 

Mr. Chairman : I am not deciding the issue myself. I will leave it 
to the House. May I know what time the hon. Law Minister will take 
for his reply ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: In view of the long speeches and the varied arguments 
advanced I would take about one and a quarter hours : possibly I might 
take even more, I do not know. 

Chairman : If half an hour is taken for the amendments and the 
Law Minister is going to take one and a quarter hours for his reply we 
will have to conclude the debate by 11-30. Meanwhile if hon. Members 
are contented to confine their speeches to ten minutes, so that more 
hon. Members will be able to take part in the debate, I would like to 
conclude the debate precisely at 11-30. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal): It was decided that the 
amendments will not be put to the House at all. 

Pandit Malaviya : The Deputy Speaker said that he would call 
upon the Law Minster at 11-30. But since we have the time, other 
Members may be given an opportunity to speak and if you do not 
think it necessary, the rule about ten minutes may not be laid down. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1146 

1146 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Chairman : The hon. Member need not jump to any conclusion, 
that because a lady is in the Chair, therefore, she may not be fair 
to the House. I would like to respect the religious susceptibilities of 
the House as much as anybody else. The Deputy Speaker has told 
the House that half an hour would be taken for the amendments. It 
is true that the Hon. Minister will be called upon to reply at 11-30. 
There is also another traditional procedure, namely the closure motion. 
In view of these two facts I would like the debate to be concluded by 
11-30 and not later. 

Shri V. J. Gupta (Madras) : What about the closure motion ? 

Mr. Chairman : Now that the House has agreed that the Hon. Law 
Minister is to be called upon to reply to the debate at 11-30, there is 
no necessity for the motion. Agreement is always better than closure 
and its acceptance. 

*Khwaja Inait Ullah (Bihar) : ( English translation of the Urdu 
speech) After deliberating long, I had decided not to say anything about 
this Bill. I stick to this very decision of not speaking on the matter 
even today, whether or not Hindu Code Bill be passed. Well, it is a 
different thing altogether... 

An Hon. Member : Do speak. 

Khwaja Inait Ullah : I should say, but I do not want to. It is a 
different thing that our brethren also should treat their sisters and 
daughters in the same way as I personally do. But, as the name ‘Hindu 
Code Bill’ is attached to this Bill and it is said that this legislation is 
being formulated particularly for those following the Hindu religion, 
I feel that from the viewpoint of Religion, it is not proper for me as 
a Muslim to interfere in the social law of Hindus wherein they want 
to make, or are making changes. 

An Hon. Member : It should be done as a human being. 

Khwaja Inait Ullah : Yes, I am doing it as a human being, but 
while being a human being, I am an Indian and a Muslim also. It is, 
therefore, that I want to give out my impressions just in accordance 
with my own religion. All the amendments at hand now have compelled 
me to express my views, There is an amendment that all those, viz., 
Muslims, Christians and others, who have been exempted from the 
operation of this law, be also included. 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 20th September 1951, pp. 2926-29. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1147 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1147 

Shri J.R. Kapoor (Uttar Pradesh) : Only if they so desire. 

Khwaja Inait Ullah : If they so desire, and also those who do not. 
Amendment No. 90 runs : “This Code applies to all Indians irrespective 
of their religion, caste or creed.” Likewise, it is also in 91, 92 and 93. 
Some members — my hon. friend Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee, especially 
while moving this amendment said at the very outset that “secularism” 
was spreading like a disease in India. I regret to say that my friend, 
who is so very capable, thinks secularism, which is not a disease but 
a cure, to be a disease and wants that all the laws under it be made 
uniform, i.e., the laws that are made for Hindus be also made applicable 
to the Muslims. This is quite correct if it (the law) is a law of economy, 
a political law, influencing somebody’s character or the social life of 
India ; it should then definitely be one ; but secularism never means 
that such laws and personal laws be formulated as may be same for a 
Hindu and a Muslim. It means that the same will be said about Hindus 
as about Muslims, though it is not necessary so for a personal law as 
we have several laws which ‘differ from those of Hindus. Just yesterday 
a Sikh colleague of mine, said that their laws also differed from those 
of Hindus. I do not intend discussing that aspect of the matter, but I 
only submit about its application to Muslims. 

Our Hon. Minister Gadgil said in his speech yesterday that he 
wanted to change the social law of the Hindus, and for changing this 
he advanced the argument, which I think he did successfully, that since 
this law has been seeing changes’, we are also entitled to change it. 
But he said furthermore that they would try in this way so that in 
the days to come the Muslims may be included. To him I would ‘like 
to submit humbly that they can change that law only because of the 
fact that the Hindu Law, as he proved, has been seeing changes. But 
here I want to tell him that Muslim law has neither been changed for 
the last 1350 years, nor shall it be changed in the days to come, since 
Muslims believe that their laws for marriage and division of property 
are not made by them but made by God and as they appear in the 
Holy Quran so nobody on the surface of this earth has the right to 
change them. 

Sardar B. S. Man (Punjab) : Do the Muslims of the Punjab abide 
by the law of Shariat or the law of Custom, which is entirely different 
from Shariat ? 

Khwaja Inait Ullah : If somebody says that the Muslims of the 
Punjab drink, does it mean that all Muslims will be allowed to take 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1148 


1148 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

wine ? If any Musalman does something bad, does it mean that all 
others will be allowed to do the same ? If any Muslim does not abide 
by the law of Islam, I am not prepared to make him do so, forcibly. He 
is at liberty ; he may go against his conscience, against his religion and 
against his society. But so long as his actions are not harmful to society, 
neither myself nor any Government can interfere in it. 

Sardar B. S. Man : According to Islamic law a thief should be buried 
alive, or his hands should be cut off. Is this law observed in any Islamic 
country ? 

Khwaja Inait Ullah : My friend Mr. Man has raised a reasonable 
question. If he sees me outside, I shall explain to him in a convincing 
way. Here I do not want to take any more time of the House. In Islam 
there is a permission for some laws, as to what extent they can be 
brought in line with the laws of the country. I can say to what extent 
Islam has allowed its laws to be brought in line with the laws of the 
country, and also the limit which should not be transgressed. I would like 
to submit to him that, if a thief in an Islamic country is not punished 
according to the Islamic law, there is a permission that we can change 
it; but some laws are such that we cannot change. I would, therefore, 
like to submit to these friends... 

Most of my time was taken by my friends in their interruptions. I 
should also get that amount of time. 

Mr. Chairman : That will not be made good. 

Khwaja Inait Ullah : I was submitting that it is not a right course 
for this House to make for Muslims as well the law which to any extent 
goes against their religious commandments. This Bill can be passed with 
majority, but I do want to submit humbly that nobody perforce can be 
asked to follow a certain law. Majority should not compel us. I want 
that Muslims should not be compelled to agree to this law. Nobody will 
refuse to agree to the other laws of the majority. 

Some of my friends said that all those who reside in India are Hindus. 
I take pride in calling myself a Hindu. I, too, say that all the inhabitants 
of India are Hindus. I am positively a political Hindu. Not from today 
but for the last twenty to twenty-five years I have been calling myself a 
political Hindu. Here I also want to say that apart from being a Hindu 
politically, I am and shall continue to be a Muslim by religion. 

An Hon. Member : What are you racially ? 

Khwaja Inait Ullah : I am Hindu. My forefathers were Brahmins 
and Brahmin blood is flowing in my veins — that pure blood which has 
not been mixed up so far. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1149 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1149 

Well, the sum and substance of my speech is that no such law 
as is against the Commandments of our religion and of God, be 
thrust on us, but as an Indian I shall have no objections to agree 
to any social or economic legislations. 

*Kumari Padmaja Naidu (Hyderabad) : I welcome this 
opportunity of expressing my unqualified support for the Bill. I 
would like at the very outset to congratulate the Government on its 
courage in bringing forward this measure in spite of the widespread 
and fierce hostility towards it that has been so sedulously instigated 
by the forces of reaction that still, alas ! today dominate certain 
sections of this country. The author of this Bill does not stand 
in need of any words of praise from me. For, with this measure, 
whether this House chooses to accept or reject it, Dr. Ambedkar 
takes his place in the long line of social legislators who throughout 
the ages have laboured diligently, always in the face of opposition, 
often in the face of persecution, to eradicate social injustice and to 
enhance the sum total of human happiness. 

For many years men and women throughout the length and 
breadth of this vast country have eagerly awaited the enactment 
of this Bill. They have watched with increasing alarm its decline 
from its original forcefulness because it was considered expedient 
for compromise after compromise to be made in order to win the 
maximum support for it. But even in its present and mutilated 
form this Bill is only comprehensive measure that has ever been 
shaped for the liberation of Hindu women from the age-old bondage 
of the unequal laws to which they are still subject. I do not ignore, 
neither do I make the mistake of over-estimating, the volume 
of protest from the poor deluded women whose ignorance and 
superstition has been exploited with subtle insidiousness by the 
vested interests of bigotry determined to defend their last bastions 
to the bitter end. What a tragic spectacle it is that we witness in 
India today of Hindu women allowing themselves to be hypnotised 
into denouncing the very measure that has been so carefully devised 
to secure for them the equality of laws to which they are entitled 
under the Constitution. But today it is neither as a woman nor as 
a Hindu that I plead for support to this Bill. I speak as an Indian, 
passionately jealous of the honour of India which is pledged not 
only to this measure but to every other form of social legislation 
necessary to redress grievous wrongs and to alleviate human 


P.D. Vol. XV, Part II, 20th September 1951, pp. 2929-33. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-03.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1150 


1150 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

suffering arising out of unjust laws. So long as any section of the 
people of this country continue to be debarred, on the grounds of sex 
or caste or creed, from the full enjoyment of equal rights, so long 
will our Constitution continue to be a hollow mockery. And what of 
the freedom for which a long and gallant fight was waged, a fight 
that was shared by thousands of sensitive Hindu women who, for 
the first time in their lives, left the precious sanctuary of their 
sheltering homes. They came to the battlefield and stood besides 
their brothers and faced jail and lathi charges and often enough, 
humiliation, worse than death. If today those thousands of Hindu 
women who fought for the independence of India are to be denied 
their just rights, then our hard-earned freedom is no more than a 
handful of dust. 

I have studied with some care the numerous speeches and 
statements that have been made by various Hon. Members of this 
House, far better qualified than I can ever aspire to be, to judge the 
technical legal implications of this Bill. I must confess that I have 
been a little surprised to find that with all their forensic skill and 
expert dialectic they have not been able to forge many weapons with 
which to bludgeon this Bill and none of them with sufficient validity 
of sanction to be lethal. We have all grown a little tired of having 
it proclaimed in every language, in every conceivable permutation 
and combination of phraseology of bearing it shouted day after day 
from the house stops and the market place and highways and by- 
lanes that this Bill threatens to destroy the very stuff and texture 
of the fabric of Hindu society. In a statement that unfortunately 
received nationwide publicity in America, a very distinguished hon. 
Member of this House has declared that this Bill is an attack on 
an ancient and gentle religion that has survived for five thousnad 
years. He announced that because now the very structure of Hindu 
society was threatened, he intended “to fight and fight and fight 
against it”. It passes my comprehension that anybody who is proud 
of calling himself a Hindu can talk or even think in such terms 
without realsing that he is dishonouring the very religion that he 
claims to defend, as though any of the great religions of the world 
that have survived through centuries of human history could be 
endangered by social legislation or by any speeches or writings or 
other form of human endeavour. If there is any religion in the world 
that can be imperilled by these trivial things, then it deserves to 
be allowed to perish. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1151 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1151 

Speaking three days ago on the floor of this House, Dr. Syama 
Prasad Mookerjee described in very moving terms the immemorial 
beauty and wisdom of the teachings of Hinduism. He spoke of its 
comparable flexibility — I think he used the word adaptability — that 
had enabled Hindu philosophy to survive through centuries of foreign 
invasion and alien domination resisting wave after wave of the 
fiercest political and religious and economic onslaught. Surely, for 
all time to come Dr. Mookerjee has given the final answer to the 
futile and foolish argument that any social legislation intended to 
render justice to the under-privileged can imperil an ancient religion 
based on the loftiest conceptions of the sanctity and indivisible 
unity of all life. 

Another serious charge which is sought to be levelled against 
this Bill is that by making legal provisions for divorce it will open 
wide the flood gates of immorality. It has been proved conclusively 
by speaker after speaker that there was provision for divorce even 
in ancient times. We are all aware that more than 75 per cent, 
of the Hindus in this country have always had the benefit of an 
easy and simple and effective system of divorce. So, this argument 
seems to lack any real validity and I think it has been employed 
merely to indulge in what is fast becoming a national pastime 
in this country that of disparaging the West and western ways. 
May I be permitted to express my regret at the growing 325 PSD. 
tendency in this country to make sweeping generalisations about 
the morals and manners of other races in other countries ? This 
tendency is all the more deplorable because only too often hasty 
judgement is founded on insufficient knowledge, usually gleaned 
from the sensational publicity given to the doings of a handful of 
neurotics and decadents such as are to be found in every country 
of the world. Certainly, they are to be found in every big city of 
India. Dr. Mookerjee rightly drew our attention to a grave problem 
that is today troubling the psychologists of the West and that is 
the growing prevalence of psychoses corresponding to rise in the 
rate of divorce. But may I respectfully suggest to Dr. Mookerjee 
that if he would pause and ponder over this problem and analyse 
it carefully he will find that the psychoses are not the result but 
the root cause of much of the divorce in the West. In many western 
countries, particularly those that have been ravaged by the last two 
great World Wars, the entire equilibrium of life has been seriously 
disturbed. Acute economic distress, and a morbid obsession with the 
atom bomb and the imminence of another World War — all these cause 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1152 


1152 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

tensions that lead to both physical and mental insecurity. These 
inevitably result in a certain emotional instability which must of 
necessity have its repercussions on family life. But the fact remains 
that whatever may be the abnormal conditions in some countries, 
whatever may be the outward variations of morals and manners in 
different races, fundamentally the human race is the same everywhere 
and even today in every Country of the world the family unit continues 
to be the very core of human society. Normally balanced men and 
women value a certain grace and dignity in human relationships and 
they do not resort to divorce light-heartedly. It is only when they 
are driven to it as the only ultimate solution of a situation that has 
become intolerable that they resort to divorce. And if this be true of 
men, it is I think, a hundralfold more true of women. Because in this 
changing and unstable world, devastated by wars and revolutions and 
famines, where all standards of ethical values are wavering, where 
all national and international codes of morality are vacillating, there 
still remains one thing changeless and unchanging — one thing that 
is still today what it was at the dawn of creation and what it will 
be at the end of time. And that is woman’s inherent consciousness of 
the grave responsibility that rests on her through her high destiny 
as the creator and guardian of the sacred flame of life. And perhaps 
in no other country of the world has that consciousness flowered in 
such perfection of beauty as in this ancient land of ours whose annals 
are rich with literature and legend inspired by the high ideals of our 
women. So, it is a little unworthy of us that we should talk lightly and 
flippantly about the capacity of the Indian woman to wear her freedom 
with dignity. To do so is to confess to a sad lack of understanding of 
the very genius of our race. 

Some resentment has been expressed by hon. Members who have 
objected to the theory that this Bill should be passed merely bcause 
the eyes of foreign countries are upon us. I am in entire agreement 
with them. However much we may value the goodwill of other countries 
we cannot and will not shape our lives and legislation to suit anybody 
else’s standards. But there is a far more valid and urgent reason for 
the passing of this Bill, and that is that our national integrity, our 
self-respect as people are at stake. Many of the Hon. Members of 
this House had the high privilege of drafting the Constitution of Free 
India. Upon them there rests the heavy responsibility of redeeming 
the pledges that are embodied in it and so the question of accepting 
or rejecting this Bill is the simple one of whether we affirm or deny 
the very fundamental principles on which our Constitution is based. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1153 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1153 

*Shri Brajeshwar Prasad (Bihar) : I rise to offer my unqualified 
support to clause 2 of the Hindu Code Bill. While doing so, I would like 
to point out that if this clause is passed it will mean the perpetuation 
of a great wrong in Hindu society — the immoral distinction between 
legitimate and illegitimate children. The clause says that it applies 
to any child, legitimate or illegitimate. I know that it is not possible 
for the State to go to the extent to which I want the Government 
of India to go. I want the State to abolish the distinction between 
legitimate and illegitimate children. The stigma of illegitimacy dwarfs 
the personality of the child. It is inhuman and barbarous that millions 
of people in this country should suffer from psychological and social 
handicaps thorughout their lives for no fault of their own. It may 
be urged that the institution of marriage will be weakened if the 
distinction between legitimate and illegitimate children is obliterated. 
I submit that the Heavens will not fall if the institutuon of marriage 
is weakened in any way whatsoever. 

Pandit Maitra (West Bengal) : Does the hon. Member want 
abolition of marriage ? 

An hon. Member : No week-end marriage. 

Shri Brajeshwar Prasad : The good that is done to society by 
marriage is great, but the harm that is done to society by illegitimacy 
is also very great and serious. I think that it is neither possible nor 
desirable for the State to strengthen the foundations of a discredited 
social order. I can very well conceive of a society where there is no 
marriage. The Platonic ideal of a community of wives and children 
is as valid a concept today as it was during the days of Plato. If 
we are sincere about our professions of secularism if we have any 
faith in secularism — let us be frank with ourselves — we must try to 
emancipate the institutions of property and marriage from the bondage 
of religion. It is true that the secular ideal has not been realised in 
any part of the world. 

It is not secularism but Christianity that guides the institutions of 
marriage and property both in America and Europe. I am of opinion 
that the institution of marriage will not be weakened in any way 
if the distinction between legitimate and illegitimate children is 
obliterated ... 

Mr. Chairman : I think the hon. Member may reserve these views 
to the marriage Chapter. 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 20th September 1951, pp. 2933-35. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1154 

1154 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Brajeshwar Prasad : I am not expressing my views on the 
marriage Chapter. I am only visualising certain objections that may 
be raised with regard to my suggeston that the distinction between 
legitimate and illegitimate children should be obliterated. 

Shri T. Hussain (Bihar) : For the sake of information, may I 
know if my hon. friend is against legal marriage or not ? 

Shri Brajeshwar Prasad : If I get an opportunity to speak on 
the marriage clauses, I am prepared to make the distinction clear. 
I do not think that the institution of marriage will be weakened 
if the distinction between legitimate and illegitimate children is 
obliterated. For, what is the basis of marriage ? Why is the institution 
of marriage surviving ? It is old age — psychlogical enfeeblement of 
the mind and heart — which is responsible for the survival of the 
institution of marriage. It is not for the pleasures of sex ; it is not 
for the procreation of children that the institution of marriage exists 
in society. For, both these objectives can be achieved outside the 
bonds of matrimony. I am opposed to illegitimacy because it is an 
important cause of abortion, destitution, prostitution, delinquency, 
further illegitimacy, premature birth, still-birth, crimes, infanticide, 
veneral disease and cruelty to women and children. 

I am not prepared to give my moral support to an article which 
tends to perpetuate the gravest crime that is done in our society. 

*Shri B. Das (Orissa) : At the outset I wish to congratulate Dr. 
Ambedkar on behalf of myself and all those reformists who are 
Members of this House and reformists outside for the bold step he 
has taken to codify the Hindu Law. He has shown great forbearance. 
He has been characterised as the Manu of our age. But he has been 
following the precepts of Buddha and showing greater forbearance 
in agreeing that only the Chapters relating to marriage and divorce 
be taken for the time being. I support the marriage and divorce 
clauses of this Code. 

Great speeches have been made on the floor of the House. On the 
side of the Bill my hon. Friend Shri Gadgil made an excellent speech ; 
so also Pandit Kunzru. On the opposite side the speeches that have 
to be taken notice of are the ones of Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee, 
Sardar Man and my young friend Pandit Govind Malaviya. 

Dr. Mookerjee perhaps forgot the fact that the intermediate stage 
in the line of reformists from Buddha to Gandhiji was held by great 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 20th September 1951, pp. 2935-37. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1155 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1155 

Bengalis like Raja Ram Mohan Roy, Keshab Chander Sen and 
Ramakrishna Paramahamsa. It is no good for the Bengali leader to cry 
a halt to these reforms. That is not the rigth way. Hinduism has been 
a progressive religion. The various Smritis and Mimamsa, are but a 
codification of Hindu law. As pointed out by my friend Shrimati Padmaja 
Naidu, who in her ineivitable poetic way paid happy compliments to 
Dr. Ambedkar, our Constitution has given certain rights to women of 
India and Dr. Ambedkar is doing nothing more than giving effect to the 
intentions of the Constitution. 

My hon. friend Sardar Man belongs to a great nation, the fighting 
nation that has saved and maintained the freedom of India. He however 
struck a discordant note by saying that the Sikhs are not Hindus. I had 
the privilege of working with many Sikh leaders. Let us, therefore, not 
harp on our differences on the Hindu Code Bill. But I may say that if 
the Sikh opinion is sounded, now or hereafter, they would never like 
to remain stagnant. If and when such opinions are taken, we will find 
that Sikh women are for progress and advance. 

As regards Pandit Govind Malaviya, I have great affection for him, 
because I was a lieutenant of his revered and august father, the late 
Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya. My memory goes back to the thirties 
when we were passing the Child Marriage Restraint Act on the floor 
of the House. The great seer that Pandit Madan Mohan Malaviya was, 
he saw the signs of the times and although he was sad that this House 
enacted the Child Marriage Restraint Act known as the Sarda Act, he 
never opposed it in such violent language and in such words of thunder 
as my young friend Pandit Govind Malaviya did. 

Pandit Malaviya : Because these things were not proposed then. 

Shri B. Das : True. But I was only quoting my own leader and his 
august father that he was for advancement and progress. That is all 
that I wanted to submit. 

Shir A. C. Shukla (Madhya Pradesh) : For those who are weak, you 
cannot follow the highest ideal? 

Shri B. Das : Those who belong to the orthodox and conservative 
school in India have helped us in passing the Constitution. They 
have helped us, though at times a little weakly, in the battle for 
freedom that we fought for so many years. Since 1947 we are all going 
forward. If “go forward” is our motto now, then nothing will stop the 
.advancement and progress of India or any section of our community, 
be it Hindu, Muslim or any other. Therefore, instead of showing that 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1156 

1156 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

strong difference with us they should settle down to the view that 
India must progress as a nation, and if we are the first nation in Asia 
and are going to be the first nation of the world, they will help us to 
advance and progress and not deter us in any way. 

I will conclude my speech by reminding the conservative friends in 
this House that this advancement of the Hindu Code and marriage laws 
is not a new thing. We have forgotten recent reformers like Sir Hari 
Singh Gour or Dr. M. R. Jayakar who have made specific indents into 
the old traditions and customs of Hindu laws, particularly marriage 
laws. So it is no use our saying that Dr. Ambedkar threw bombshell 
and a surprise at our consevative friends. We are progressing and 
Dr. Ambedkar has done one thing. He has faced the whole problem and 
not attempted piece-meal legislation. Yet to concede to our conservative 
friends the House is almost agreed to pass only one part of the Hindu 
Code Bill. 

I support the measure. 

*Dr. Ambedkar : I think it is an extra-ordinary event in the history 
of this Parliament and, I believe, in the history of die past Legislative 
Assemblies that we should have been engaged in the discussion of 
a single clause for not less than seven days. I do not think there is 
any parallel to this. But in view of the fact that many Members have 
raised the point that this Bill touches part of their conscience, our 
Prime Minister in a righteous spirit has allowed them and also the 
Chair, the longest time that any Member might want to consume in 
order to express his mind on the subject, {An Hon. Member : Wrong). 
I have no complaint against that because it is much better that we 
should give to every individual, whether he speaks for or against, the 
fullest opportunity rather than create a feeling in the Members who 
do not see eye to eye with Government — to go home with a feeling — 
that they have been choked. I hope that, notwithstanding the fact that 
seven precious days have been spent in the discussion of this clause, 
when this clause is put to vote no Member will have a complaint on 
any such ground at all. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : I have. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The debate on this clause has as a matter of fact 
taken place in two parts. A part of the debate took place in the last 
session of Parliament, and this is a sort of a supplementary debate to 
the original debate. I am sorry to say that notwithstanding the fact 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 20th September 1951, pp. 2937-59. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1157 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1157 

that I have paid the closest possible attention to the speeches which 
have been delivered in what I call the supplementary debate it has not 
been possible for me to find out what new point has been raised in the 
course of this supplementary debate which was not raised in the original 
debate. The only new factor which I have discovered in the course of 
this supplementary debate is the speech made by my friend Dr. Syama 
Prasad Mookerjee and another by our friend Mr. Man. Beyond that there 
has been nothing more than an expansive debate on points which were 
probably touched upon in the original debate. 

With regard to Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee I have a feeling that it 
is not necessary to take him seriously at all. He has, it seems to me, 
no mind of his own. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : have you ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have, most certainly. 

He was, as hon. Members of the House will know, a member of this 
Government practically for four years, during which this Bill has been 
placed before this House by the Government in office. I have not any 
recollection whatsoever, during the course of these four years when Dr. 
Syama Prasad Mookerjee was a member of the Government and when 
the Government had already sponsored this bill and put it before the 
House and it was in bits being discussed by Members of the House, that 
there was any single occasion inside the Cabinet when Dr. Mookerjee 
to my knowledge expressed the slightest difference of opinion on this 
Bill as against the Government. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar) : Is it open for the Hon. Minister 
to disclose what happened there or what did not happen there ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am saying so. I remember also that in the earlier 
part, there were many party meetings held to discuss what should be done 
with regard to this particular Bill. I have a very clear recollection that in 
most of the meetings that were held, Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee was 
present and even then I do not recollect a single occasion when Dr. Syama 
Prasad Mookerjee — in the party which is an informal thing and where 
members of the Government are free to express their personal opinions, 
which they may not express outside on account of the joint responsibility — 
ever said anything against this Bill. It is, therefore, as I said, a matter 
of moods. (An hon. Member : Conviction.) Not at all. Either a man has a 
conviction or he has no conviction. That is my point. (An Hon. Member : He 
has resigned from the Cabinet.) I am sorry to say that he is to my mind 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1158 


1158 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a very tragic case, a tragic case of a sober, good well-behaved man, 
who having joined the company of the drunkards rolls from side to 
side and has become an inebriate himself. 

An Hon. Member : A good comparison. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Secondly, I have been noticing the performances of 
Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee ever since he has left the Government 
and has become a member of the Opposition, in fact almost a leading 
member of the Opposition and I have noticed that he has developed 
the unfortunate mentality which sometimes Leaders of Opposition 
develop, namely to oppose everything that comes from Government. 
In view of that, when a person is not prepared to discuss matters 
on merits but wants to oppose for the sake of opposition, it is, I 
think, hardly worth one’s while to waste one’s time and breath in 
order to meet his argument. As I said, that is the reason why I do 
not propose to take what Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee has said in 
a very serious manner. 

I, therefore, propose to deal only with the general points that have 
been raised by various speakers against clause 2 and generally against 
the Bill. The first point which perhaps is a new point is this, that 
there is really no necessity for the sort of Bill that we had brought 
forward. It is contended that the Hindu Society is a very ancient 
society, much more ancient than the Roman or the Greek Society 
and perhaps as old as the Egyptian Society. It has been contended 
that today all that we know about the Roman Society or the Greek 
Society or the Egyptian Society is their history ; they no longer exist; 
they have disappeared. The only ancient society which has survived 
is the Hindu Society and if the Hindu Society has survived while 
all other ancient societies have disappeared, then its laws, its social 
structure, its principles must be good. Otherwise, it could not have 
survived. 

This is not the first time that I have heard this argument. I 
have heard this argument a long time ago and not only heard it 
from men in the streets, but men who have been occupying most 
eminent positions such as those who are called the historians 
of India. This is an argument which had been presented all 
the time by those who believe in the sanctity of the ancient 
structure of this society. I must very frankly say that I too have 
been a student of India’s history, although I cannot claim that 
I am as good a student as many others who adorn the chairs of 
history in many of our universities. I believe, I have a sufficient 
understanding of the Indian history and the point that I would like 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1159 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1159 

to raise is this. Is survival enough or whether it is necessary for us to 
consider whether the plane on which we survived is more important 
than the mere survival itself ? A man who mixes with his opponent 
in battle vanquishes him, obtains victory on him also survives. A man 
who meets his opponent, runs away from him like a coward and he 
also survives. Is the survival of the victor of the same value, of the 
same character as the survival of a coward ? I think we ought to 
consider this question on what plane has the Hindu society survived. 
{An Hon. member : Survival of the fittest). Yes, but on circumstanes. 
Here my friends will forgive me saying so, when I examine the history 
of India, we have survived, yes, but we have survived as people who 
have been from time to time subjugated, vanquished and enslaved. 
{An Hon. Member : Who has not been ?) Yes. My. Hon. friend asks 
me the question “who has not been ?” There are many countries and 
many communities who have lost in battle, who have been enslaved 
but I would like to remind my Hon. friend that if he studies the 
history of all vanquished people, he will realise that some day, at 
some time, the vanquished people on other parts of the world have 
tried to achieve their liberty. I have not seen any such thing in 
this country. Therefore, the argument that merely because we have 
survived when other countries have lost and gone into history is one 
which does not convince me of the goodness or the soundness of the 
social structure under which we have been living. It has been said 
that the Hindu society has been a very progressive society. It was 
an argument which my Hon. friend, Dr. Syama Prasad Mookerjee 
expatiated at great length and he pointed out that so great a radical 
reformer like the Buddha was accepted by the Hindu society as a 
great figure and not only they accepted him as a great figure but 
they adopted and accepted some of the principles which he advocated 
in his life. 

It is no doubt one of the great qualities of Hindu society to absorb 
some things from those who oppose it. But, my point is this. Has the 
Hindu society changed its structure as a result of the absorption of 
the doctrine of their opponents ? Let me develop the position with 
regard to the Buddha. What did he preach ? He preached equality. 
He was the greatest opponent of chatur varna ; he was the greatest 
opponent of belief in the Vedas because he believed in reason and . 
did not believe in the infallibility of any book. He believed in ahimsa, 
the Brahmanic society accepted some things. What did they accept ? 
They accepted the most innocuous dogma of ahimsa. Nobody was 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1160 


1160 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

prepared to accept and they did not accept — they opposed — his belief 
in equality. Notwithstanding the fact that it has abosrbed bits and 
bits of something which is of an innocuous character it did not touch 
the main thing on which they were all united namely to maintain 
chatur varna. That is the reason why notwithstanding this assimilative 
and adaptive quality, they have remained what they have always 
been. We have for long number of years waited to see whether Hindu 
society would, as a result of the absorption of the doctrines preached 
by great men who have been born in this country or great men born 
outside the country, change its social structure. Most of us, speaking 
for myself, have been completely disappointed. Whatever else Hindu 
society may adopt, it will never give up its social structure for the 
enslavement of the Sudra and the enslavement of women. It is for 
this reason that law must now come to their rescue in order that 
society may move on. 

Pandit Malaviya: Move on to what even Buddha could not do. 

Dr. Ambedkar : People have been saying that Hindu society 
has been changing. The question that I want to ask is this. Is this 
change in the direction of progress or it is a change in the other 
direction ? Any one who has studied the history of Arya society from 
the very beginning to the present day will have to admit, if he is a 
fair student of history, that whatever change has taken place, it has 
been a deterioration. There was, as everybody knows, no caste system 
among the Aryans. There may have been some kind of varna system; 
but the varna system never came in the way of inter-marriages. You 
can find many number of cases of Brahmans marrying untouchable 
women. Kashatriyas marrying sudras and sudras marrying upper 
class women. 

Pandit Malaviya: Which were the instances ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I can give many instances if you will come to my 
room. I have got them. 

Pandit Malaviya : Why not now ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : But, the Aryans never had a hide-bound social 
system of class division that was later introduced. Nobody can deny 
that has been a subsequent change. 

You examine the position of Hindu women. Our Hon. friend 
Dr. Maitra. I think, who was a member of the Rau Committee, for the 
purpose of a thesis for a Doctorate degree of the Calcutta University 
wrote a book called The Position of Women in the Hindu Shastras. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1161 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1161 

Any one who reads this book will find that women had an equal 
share in property with men. She was entitled to hold property. Even 
in Manu you find this statement. Today, what do we find as a result 
of the changes that have taken place in the Hindu society? Women 
are completely deprived of property. Do you call this change progress 
or do you call it deterioration ? Therefore, it is time, I think that we 
consider this question in a different light, the point on which I wish to 
proceed is the fact that unless law makes society move, this lsociety 
will not move. 

Another argument which was presented to the House was this : that 
we have no policy ; we have no principle ; we have nothing on which 
we are proceeding; the only thing on which we are proceeding is a 
kind of imitation of the western nations. It is said that because the 
western nations have monogamy, because the western nations have 
divorce or because the Chinese are trying to do something along that 
direction, we, in order to put ourselves in the good books of the world 
at large, are trying to do something along the lines which they have 
been doing. They have said that our ideal should be, what ? Somebody 
said Ram ; somebody said Dasaratha; somebody said Krishna ;somebody 
said this, that and the other. I do not wish to comment upon any of 
the ideals which have been presented to the House, and I do not ... 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : You will be well advised not to do so. 

Mr. Chairman : Order, order. 

Dr. Ambedkar : My ideals are derived from the Constitution 
that we have laid down. The preamble of the Constitution speaks of 
liberty, equality and fraternity. We are therefore bound to examine 
every social institution that exists in the country and see whether 
it satisfies the principles laid down in the Constitution. Now, so far 
as your sacramental marriage is concerned, forgive me, I am quite 
convinced in my own mind that no man who examines mat institution 
in a fair, honest and liberal spirit can come to the conclusion that 
our sacramental marriage satisfies either the ideal of liberty or of 
equality. What is the sacramental ideal of marriage ? Sacramental 
ideal of marriage described in as few words as possible, is polygamy 
for the man and perpetual slavery for the woman. 

An Hon. Member : Wonderful description. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is so because under no circumstances can 
a woman get her liberty from her husband, however bad he may be, 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1162 


1162 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

however undesirable a person he may be. I want to put one question to 
the House. Are we for slavery or are we for free labour ? What are we 
for ? Now, in all economic matters, we have all along been insisting that 
there must be free labour. Slavery we shall not tolerate. 

An hon. Member : Is this slavery ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Now, what is the difference between slavery and 
free labour ? I think if you examine it carefully, you will come to the 
conclusion that free labour means the ability and the capacity to break 
the contract when the necessity for breaking the contract arises. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari (Assam) : And is this a contract ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Yes, I shall come to that. 

Therefore, if the woman under the sacramental marriage is to get her 
freedom, then circumscribe as you may, the conditions for her getting 
her freedom, and as I said, I shall be quite prepared to consider any 
proposal that may be made by any Member from any side of the House 
to narrow down the conditions of divorce that have been prescribed in 
the Bill as it stands. But if you mean to give liberty — and you cannot 
deny that liberty in view of the fact that you have placed it in your 
Constitution and praised the Constitution which guarantees liberty and 
equality to every citizen — then you cannot allow this institution to stand 
as it is. That is the reason why we are proceeding with this Bill and not 
because we want to imitate any other people or we want to go in for our 
ancient ideals which are to my judgement, most archaic and impossible 
for anybody to practice. 

Dr. C. D. Pande (Uttar Pradesh) : We are ready to support the 
Bill, but we do not want these invectives. How far the Hon. Minister is 
justified in dealing with this subject and resorting to such invectives. I 
do not know ? 

An hon. Member : Why vilify the Hindu religion ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Now, I come to the specific amendments that have 
been tabled by various Members to clause 2. 

Shri Krishnanand Rai (Uttar Pradesh) : The House is for divorce 
and monogamy, but not for this kind of abuse. 

Dr. C. D. Pande : We are for these provisions, but we do not want 
these abuses and invectives. 

Dr. Ambedkar : If you had said that before, I would not have made 
this speech at all and not spent seven days over this Bill. 

The Prime Minister (Shri Jawaharlal Nehru) : I am rather 
surprised at the tender skin of some of the hon. Members. We have 
had to put up with a series of speeches and things have been said 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1163 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1163 

which have hurt us very much. If that has not been objected to, then I 
think it is expected that those who disagree with Dr. Ambedkar should 1 
not object now. 

Pandit Maitra : We have been listening with rapt attention to Dr. 
Ambedkar, but what we do not want is these invectives and reflections 
on some of the best ideals which we cherish. The provisions can be 
defended without injuring the religious susceptibilities of Members. 

Mr. Chairman : I do not think there is any need for excitement. 
As the Prime Minister has said, many Hon. Members who had spoken 
had said so many things, and naturally when the Hon. Law Minister 
is replying, he has to make certain statements, and he deserves to be 
heard. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Now, I come to the specific amendments that have 
been tabled to this clause. As you will observe ( Interruptions ). 

Mr. Chairman : I do not want side conversations to go on across 
the benches. 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is one general amdendment, that this Bill 
should be made optional. This amendment has taken various shapes 
and forms. In one shape it means that the Hindus to which this Bill 
is made applicable, should be allowed option either to have it applied 
to them or not be applied to them. Another shape in which the same 
amendment has come is that if any other people, such as for instance 
the Muslims, to whom this Bill does not apply, desire that the Bill 
should be applied to them, there should be provision in it to that effect. 
The other shape which this amendment takes is that it should be left 
to the States to apply or not to apply this Bill. Now, I will deal with 
the general amendment in all the three shapes in which it has been 
presented to us. 

With regard to the first aspect of the matter, that its application 
even to the Hindus should be optional. Last time, the Deputy Speaker 
came to the rescue of many Members by pointing out that there was a 
precedent for a thing like this. I think hon. Members will remember that 
he referred to the Shariat Act and the Khoja Momin or Khoja Act, and 
therefore, he said there was no danger or anything strange in making 
a similar provision so far as the application of the Bill to the Hindus 
is concerned. Since that time, I have spent much time in examining 
whether the statment made by the Hon. Deputy Speaker — I am sorry 
he is not here — is true in fact. And I find that this has been a sort of 
lapse of memory on his part. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1164 


1164 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Are you criticising the Deputy Speaker’s 
ruling or are you criticising the remarks of Shri Ananthasayanam 
Ayyangar ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am dealing with the statement of Shri 
Ananthasayanam Ayyangar. I am glad the hon. Member is so technical 
today. 

Shri Syamanandan Sahaya : I am, so all the time. But the Hon. 
Minister is taking advantage of his position as a member of the Cabinet. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I find that in the course of the debate on the Bill 
which took place in the year 1937, my Hon. friend Shri Ananthasayanam 
Ayyangar himself raised this question about the applicability of the Bill 
and I find that his speech is spread over practically to two pages here. 
As I said, he raised this very question whether that Bill was going to 
take away the option that was given to the Khojas. He put this question 
direct to Mr. Jinnah, because as the House will remember, the Shariat 
Bill was not a Government Bill. It was a private Member’s Bill which 
was brought in and practically Mr. Jinnah was in charge of that Bill. 
And Mr. Jinnah had given an absolutely categorical answer to Shri 
Aanthasayanam Ayyangar that not only was that Bill complusory, but 
even the option given to the Khojas would be taken away by that Bill. 

Pandit Maitra : Why not inform the House of the background of that 
Bill also ? I was there when the Bill was being discussed and I know 
that Mr. Jinnah wanted the Muslims not to be governed by any Hindu 
law at all. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I can give the book, it is here, and anyone who wants 
to read the whole debate can do so. I cannot spend any more time on 
this because I have to deal with the amendments. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : That debate is of which year ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : 1937. The only difficulty that ... 

Shri Bhatt : Was that Shariat Bill passed, or referred to a Select 
Committee or dropped ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The Bill was passed and it was decided that no 
option was to be given. 

The only difficulty that arose was that when they introduced clause 3, 
it was introduced in the House without the assistance of the draftsman 
and what happened was that they introduced the word “Act” instead 
of referring to it as “clause”. That defect was cured by my friend 
Mr. Kazmi, who brought in a Bill in 1943 and substituted the word 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1165 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1165 

“clause” for the word “Act”. Therefore, the ground that there is a precedent, 
I submit, falls through. 

[12 Noon] 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : May I bring to the notice of the Law Minister 
that this Act of 1937, I suppose, repeals the previous Kutchi Memon Act, 
according to which option was given and what the Deputy Speaker as a 
Member of this House brought to notice was that there was, in fact, in 
force for a number of years a legislation which gave option. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That was before, that was taken away. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : All the same for a number of years that sort of 
legislation did hold good. That was the point made by him. 

Dr. Ambedkar : We are discussing the question whether the 1937 
Act gave an option. That is the point. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Mr. Ayyangar’s point was that the 1923 Act 
gave the option. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am sorry I cannot give way. 

Mr. Chairman : If there is any inconsistency in the speech hon. 
Members may bring it up at a later stage, when there will be a good 
deal of opportunity. 

Shri Amolakh Chand : What is the latest position now ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : No option. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : There was option for a long time. 

Dr. Ambedkar : For Cutchies. 

I will take the proposal to grant option. Apart from precedents what 
would be the consequences ? Suppose we adopt this proposal of giving 
option. Hon. Members will remember that there are certain States like 
Bombay and Madras, where the legislature has enacted laws regulating 
marriage and divorce. In those two Acts there is no option whatsoever 
given. They are compulsory on every body who resides or is domiciled 
there. If we adopt this law, it being a central law, it will supersede 
the laws of the provincial legislature in so far as it is inconsistent with 
those laws, by reason of the fact that this is legislation in the concurrent 
field. The one consequence will be that whatever progress the States 
of Bombay and Madras have achieved in the matter of monogamy and 
divorce will be completely destroyed. 

Shri Gautam (Uttar Pradesh) : What will be the position of the 
Muslims in Bombay ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1166 


1166 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. Ambedkar : It applies to the Hindus only. I will shortly come to 
the Muslims, do not worry. I will not run away from the point. Therefore, 
the one consequence will be that the two States which have achieved a 
certain degree of social advancement will be set back. 

Shir R. J. Kapoor : Keep it alive. 

Dr. Ambedkar : How can you ? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : By saying “Save and notwithstanding anything 
contained herein this Act will ...” 

Dr. Ambedkar : That will be fantastic legislation just to satisfy my 
hon. Friend. So this consequence has also to be taken into consideration. 

What is the position today ? Certain States have laws relating to 
monogamy and divorce. Certain other States have no such legislation. 
The one thing that has to be remembered is that under our Constitution 
no State has got extra-territorial jursidiction. The law applies either to 
the resident when he is resident there or to a person who is domiciled. 
If a person marries in Bombay he shall have to marry under that State’s 
Act. If he wants to divorce his wife on grounds which are not permitted 
by the Bombay law, he can easily go to U.P., where no such law exists, 
divorce his wife and marry again, thereby altogether destroying the 
validity of the Bombay legislation. It is something like prohibition. An 
isolated State cannot have prohibition. If it is to be there it must be all 
through, so that no man can go to another State and break the law of 
the State in which he resides normally. Therefore, in this case either 
there should be no legislation and leave things as they are or if you 
want legislation, it must be an all India legislation, so that no man or 
woman would be able to break the law. 

The third difficulty is that although they have tabled amendments 
to the effect that option should be given, they have not indicated the 
nature of that option. Are women to have the right to make an option 
or not ? If the father makes an option that this law applies to him, 
does his option apply to his son and progeny ? If the husband makes 
an option under this law, will it apply to his wife by reason of the fact 
that she is his wife ? If the husband does not apply it to himself, will 
the wife be free to do so ? 

Shri Bharati (Madras) : All confussion. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It would be utter confussion, if such an amendment 
was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1167 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1167 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : What does the proviso to clause 2 say ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am afraid I cannot add any such proviso. Our 
law may be deformed in some way but it should not altogether be 
unaesthetic ; It must be good to look at. 

I now come to the other aspect of the argument, namely of allowing 
other people to have the law apply to them. I should not have dealt 
with it but for that fact that Dr. Mookerjee referred to the fact that this 
law was not made applicable to Muslims. He charged the Government 
with either want of sincerity or want of courage that they can never 
bring such a legislation so far as the Muslim community is concerned. 
With regard to this matter, Members have said that we are enacting a 
piece of legislation which is discriminatory for the simple reason that 
the Hindus today have the right to marry more than one woman and 
the Muslims have a right to marry four but that we are taking away 
the right of the Hindu leaving the right of the Muslim unaffected. 
That they say, is discrimanatory. With all respect I would invite the 
attention of Members to article 25 of the Constitution, which says: 

“Subject to public order, morality and health and to the other 
provisions of this Part, all persons are equally entitled to freedom 
of conscience and the right freely to profess practise and propagate 
religion.” 

I want to draw the attention of Members to the words “the right 
freely to profess and practise their religion”. I am not concerned for 
the moment with propagation of religion. 

Last time when I spoke on this Bill, I made it quite clear that in 
our country, fortunately or unfortunately, the profession of a particular 
religion carries with it the personal law of the person. You cannot get 
away from that position. Similarly, when you say to a Muslim that 
under the Constitution he is free to profess and practise his religion, 
we are practically giving him the right to practise his personal law. 
In view of the fact that the Constitution allows different communities 
to practise their religion and incidentally also to have their personal 
law, there is nothing discriminatory in allowing one community to 
have their own law or to modify it in the way they like and to treat 
the law of the other community in a different way or to modify it. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab) : According to Hindu law 
a person can marry more than one wife, according to Mahommedan 
law also a person is entitled to have more than one wife, but there 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1168 


1168 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is no obligation on any Muslim to have more than one wife nor is there 
any obligation on any Hindu to have more than one wife. The personal 
religion of both is the same on this point. Similarly, it is not enjoined 
upon a Mussalman to practise child marriage, nor is it enjoined upon a 
Hindu to practise child marriage, for the Smriti and the Hadis of both 
say the same thing on this point. Therefore, the Child Marriage Act was 
applied to the Muslims also. It is not going against the Muslim law or 
the Shariat law if we make this law applicable to them today. So far 
as article 25 is concerned you will not be following this 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am answering the other argument that we are 
making a discrimination. To that I am giving the answer that the 
Constitution permits us to treat different communities differently and 
if we treat them differently nobody can charge the Government with 
practising discrimination. That is the point. That being so, another thing 
I would like to tell the House is that article 25 is an article of great 
importance, for this reason. As the House will remember, all throughout 
the history of Europe there has been a great contest between the Church 
and the State. The State has said that the Church shall not interfere in 
religion and that the State is supreme over Church. The Church, on the 
other hand has said that the State is subordinate to the Church, it is 
only when the Church permits that the State can enact. That has been 
the general position. In our Constitution we adopted a middle course ; 
the course that we adopted was this, that while we will permit people 
to practise and to profess their religion and, incidentally, to have their 
personal law because the personal law is so imbedded in their religion, 
yet the State has retained all along in article 25 the right to interfere 
in the personal law of any community in this country. There can be no 
argument against that. That is my point. The only question is the time, 
the occasion and the circumstances. 

I want to assert in this House while I am here that I shall hear no 
argument from any community to say that this Parliament has no right 
to interefere in their personal law or any other laws. This Parliament 
is absolutely supreme and we deal with any community so far as their 
personal law is concerned apart from their religion. Let no community 
be in a state of mind that they are immune from the sovereign authority 
of this Parliament. 

Shri A. C. Shukla : You pass a law but cannot administer it. 

Dr.. Ambedkar : The point really is a very narrow one and that 
point is this ; whether right now we should make our Bill applicable 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1169 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1169 

to the Muslims — the Hindu Code Bill which has been professedly, 
deliberately, calculatedly intended to apply to what is called the Hindu 
community. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Non-Hindus also. 

Dr. Ambedkar : We have been, in making this kind of a legislation, 
observing a certain necessary procedure as a condition precedent. 
In all social legislation the Government usually — as a matter of 
convention and, if I may say so, binding convention — observes the 
rules of consulting the people affected before any particular piece of 
legislation is undertaken. Hon. Members well know that with regard 
to this very Bill there was a Committee which went round from 
Province to Province, from State to State, took evidence from every 
section, every community, individuals, organised people, to find out 
what their opinion was. Nobody can say that so far as this particular 
Bill is concerned, any Committee or Government at any time consulted 
the Muslim community — that we are going to enact monogamy and 
reform the law of divorce so far as the Hindus are concerned, that 
these are the provisions that we propose to apply to them, what have 
you to say about it ? No such step has ever been taken and I think 
it would be not only unwise but a most tyrannical piece of political 
action to subject the Muslim community to any such provision without 
their being consulted beforehand. 

Pandit Maitra : Why did you not do it beforehand ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The reason why we did not is because some 
communities like the Hindu community needed the reform so badly — it 
was a slum clearance. 

Pandit Maitra : You had not the courage to do it. 

Dr. Ambedkar : This is a slum clearance. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Did you consult the Sikh community ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Oh, yes. I am dealing with it. Do not be impatient. 
I have consulted them. Do not you make a mistake. 

Shri Bhatt : Can the Hon. Minister state whether or not, if 
Parliament so desire, the opinions of Muslims and Christians may 
still be ascertained ? What is the obstacle to it ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : The obstacle is that the meal has now been served 
on the table. Let us take it now. It will take time in inviting others. 
At the same time we do not have so much food as may be offered to 
others. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1170 

1170 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Chairman : I do not want Hon. Members to go on interrupting 
throughout the length of the debate. 

Shri Bhatt : These are sweets which can stay for days together. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Regarding the other part of the option, namely that 
it should be left to the States, in one aspect I have already dealt with 
it. Suppose some States enact such laws and some States do not, the 
chaos to which I have already referred would be there and I do not 
think we could allow any such option to States which would result in 
chaos in such fundamental matters as marriage and divorce. In this 
connection I should like to say this that although it is true that the 
Rau Committee did not visit the Part B States, still when the informal 
conference took place, I did take care to invite certain representatives 
of the Part B States. One of them was the Chief Justice of Saurashtra, 
the Advocate-General of Mysore, I think, was there ... 

Shri Bhatt : How is it that the Chief Justice of Saurashtra is taken 
to represent Part ‘B’ States ? He was in the service of the State. 

Dr, Ambedkar : He knows the conditions prevailing there). 

We have done that. Now I come to the question of the Sikhs. My 
friend, Syamnandan Sahaya has gone away somewhere ... 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : I am here, very much so, Dr. Ambedkar. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Now I come to the question raised by my friend, 
Mr. Bhopinder Singh Man. His amendment is that this Bill should 
not be applied to the Sikhs. Well. I have nothing personality to say 
about this amendment because his amendment is not in any sense 
solitary as compared with the other amendments which have been 
tabled by our friend, Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad omitting the Buddhists, 
Jains, Sikhs, and so on. It is perfectly legitimate for anybody to put. 
forth his view point, but I think the Hon. Member will allow me to 
say that the tone of his speech was to me very repugnant and I think 
hurt me a great deal. 

Sardar B. S. Man : rose — 

Mr. Chairman : I do not want Hon. Members to go on interrupting 
him. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : If the Hon. Minister indulges in 
such remarks against those who oppose the Bill, we are entitled to 
interrupt him. 


Mr. Chairman : Order, order. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1171 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1171 

Shri Syamnanda Sahaya : If he goes on like that, the situation may 
become worse. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am entitled to express my opinion. 

Mr. Chairman : Order, order. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : Why don’t you ask the Minister to sit down? 

Mr. Chairman : What is the meaning of this ? There is a regular 
uproar. Hon. Members must maintain order. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : If the Hon. Minister does not sit down, does 
that mean order ? You only want to control us; not others. 

Dr. Ambedkar : My point is this (Interruptions ). 

Sardar B. S. Man : I take his retort in a sporting spirit. His speech 
is equally repugnant to us today. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am prepared to accept that. 

Mr. Chairman : All that I can say is that Hon. Members should have 
left it to the Hon. Members concerned to whom the Minister’s remark 
refers. 

Dr. Ambedkar : My point is very simple. There can be no dispute 
that Indians as such are excluding the Muslims ... 

Shri Sondhi (Punjab) : They are not Indinas. Is that so ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Let me go on in that way, because I do not find 
exact qualifying words. We non-Muslims, so to say, are not a very united 
family. I do not think it is desirable to take an unrealistic view and say 
that we are all one. We are not. But I do say that we ought to make an 
attempt to come together as far as we possibly can, and we ought not to 
sow the seeds of discord all the time. When anything of a unifying nature 
comes before the House, if somebody gets up and says. “Well, we do not 
belong to this group and we do not want to be governed by this law” ... 

Sardar Hukam Singh (Punjab) : Why did you not appeal to the 
President when he was making a declaration as to who would be the 
Scheduled Castes ? He has made that distinction. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It may have been done because of his generous spirit, 
if you will remember what happened. 

Now, that is what I do no like. In my judgement, we ought all 
of us to make a very sincere attempt to come together, at any rate. 
Each one of us may have our religious beliefs. One may believe in 
a God and one may believe in a soul. Those are spiritual matters. 
But is it not desirable that notwithstanding the differences that we 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1172 


1172 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

may have so far as our beliefs are concerned, we should try to evolve one 
single system of law by which we may be bound in our interrelations ? 

Sardar Hukam Singh : Should this not start from you ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Why should you all the time keep on saying. “I am 
different. I am not governed by this and I am not governed by that. 
Therefore, do not make your law binding upon me”. That is the point 
of my protest. 

Shri A. C. Shukla : Natures differ. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The gravamen of my hon. Friend Sardar Man’s 
charge was this that the Sikhs have not been consulted in this matter. 
My answer to his point is two-fold. If the Sikhs, have not been consulted 
as Sikhs my contention is that there was no necessity to consult them ... 

Sardar B. S. Man : Oh ! 

Dr. Ambedkar : Please let me continue. 

because all along the law has assumed that the Sikhs for the 

purposes of law are Hindus. I have examined Mulla’s Hindu Law which 
is a very handy volume and if my hon. Friend were to refer to the 
index to that volume he will find certain Acts passed by the Legislative 
Assemblies of this country to amend the Hindu Law, he will find any 
number of them. But I would like my hon. Friend to point out to me 
whether in respect of any of those laws which have been enacted by this 
Parliament effecting a change in the Hindu Law — and made applicable 
to the Sikhs — they ever consulted the Sikhs or they ever omitted the 
Sikhs. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : Because custom prevails there. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not find any such instance of consultation at 
all. Whenever a law has been passed to amend the Hindu Law, it has 
been made applicable to all persons who have been by frequent judicial 
interpretation included in the term ‘Hindu’. 

Pandit Maitra : Then what is the necessity of putting it here ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Because men like you might doubt. 

Now I come to the other part and wish to prove that the charge that 
the Sikhs were not consulted is not founded on facts. I have taken the 
trouble of going through the evidence taken by the Rau Committee 
when it toured and went to Lahore. I find that the following persons 
appeared or made statements before that Commitee. The first person 
to whom I wish to refer is Justice Teja Singh of the Lahore High 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1173 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1173 

Court. He, as a member of the punjab High Court, wrote a statement 
for the Rau Committee. I have gone through the main part of it but 
I have not found any single statement by Justice Teja Singh that this 
law should not be applied to the Sikhs. I do not know whether my hon. 
friend accepts that Justice Teja Singh has some right to speak in the 
name of the Sikh community. 

The other gentleman whose name I find from the records is Sardar 
Varyam Singh. He came as a representative of the Akali Darbar and no 
doubt he said that this Bill should not be applied to the Sikhs, because 
the Sikhs, he contended, were a more liberal people. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : Who was this gentleman ? Is there any 
description given about him? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Secretary of the Akali Darbar — that is the description 
that has been given in the records. 

The other person who had given evidence before the Rau Committee 
was Sardar Iqbal Singh. He was a lawyer and he came in his individual 
capacity. 

(Mr. Deputy Speaker in the Chair ) 

Sardar B. S. Man : What did he say ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : He said nothing. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : Then he can be safely quoted ! 

An hon. Member : Let him read his statement. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Here is the record. You can have the whole information 
you want. He said nothing against this Act being applied to Sikhs. 

Then Sardar Harnam Singh, at present Judge of the Punjab High 
Court, came and gave evidence, not in his capacity as a Sikh but in his 
capacity as a represntative of the Bar Council. There again, he raised 
no such question at all that it should not be applied to the Sikhs. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : But what was his opinion about the Hindu 
Code Bill ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : He has not opposed it. 

Now, I come to an important circumstance to which I would like to 
make definite reference. The House will remember that after the Bill 
was introduced in the House by Mr. Mandal — and it was introduced 
after the Rau Committee’s investigation was complete — even then 
Government promised that they would issue an executive circular to the 
various provincial Governments and invite their opinion on the Bill as 
introduced. That circular was also sent to Punjab. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1174 


1174 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Sondhi : In what year was that ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : 1947. 

Shri Sondhi : Before the partiton ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : No. After the partition, because the letter has been 
issued to the East Punjab Government. I will give the substance of 
the letter from the Home Secretary to the Government of East Punjab 
to the Secretary to the Government of India, Legislative Department, 
New Delhi, No. 211, dated the 3rd October 1947. In that the following 
statement is made: 

“I am directed to forward a copy of the letter so and so from the 
Registerar of the High Court of Judicature, Lahore, reporting the views 
of the Hon. Judges, etc. The Punjab Government also invited the views 
of the Commissioners and Deputy Commissioners, the High Court Bar 
Association, and five divisional headquarters, as well as of the nine 
selected non-official organisations believed to be representative of the 
Hindu and Sikh opinion. Only one of the latter Shri Sanathan Dharma 
Prathinidhi, Lahore, replied.” 

I do not think in the face of this my hon. friend can say that no 
attempt was made to canvass the opinion of the Sikh community. My 
Hon. friend also said that of the seven members consulted six opposed 
it. He may be knowing something more about it. I am however entitled 
to say that before my Hon. friend made his speech, I had one or two 
conversations with him. He told me that he was particular about the 
Anand marriage, or the customary ceremony and I told him that although 
we were passing this Bill, we are not abrogating the Anand Marriage Act 
which has been passed by the Assembly in order to regularise certain 
ceremonies which the Sikhs perform for the soleminisation of their 
marriage and I thought that he was perfectly satisfied with that. But 
it may be that some other reason has come to the surface which has 
made him to give rise to these hidden feelings which oherwise might 
have remained locked up in his breast. 

My. hon. Friend read out a judgement of Dr. Bakshi Tek Chand — it is 
reported in 10 Lahore. Kabul Singh’s case. I have examined the facts of this 
case and the rationale of the case. The only point of dispute was whether a 
marriage between a Jat Sikh and a Mazhabi woman was a legal marriage 
or not. It was contended on the other side that it was not a legal marriage 
because the Jat belonged to a superior class and the woman belonged to 
an inferior class and inter-caste marriages were not allowed. Mr. Justice 
Tek Chand held that the Jats were sudras and the rule that applied to 
thraivarani did not apply to sudras and the untouchables are treated by 
Shastras as sudras. It is a marriage between sudras. Therefore, it is valid. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1175 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1175 

Sardar B. S. Man : There is difference between an untouchable and 
a sudra. 

Dr. Ambedkar : But that is the decision of the court, my hon. friend. 
The courts have treated both as sudras and you know very well there 
is distinction on that point. 

The only point on which my hon. friend could rely was that the Sikhs 
are liberal and that they do not observe caste. Well, on that ground 
he ought to welcome this, because we are abrogating caste throughout. 
Therefore, it is in no sense in conflict with what is happening in the 
Sikh community. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : Our complaint is that we are far in advancer 
of the stage to which you say you are bringing us up. Please do not 
pull us down. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Different people have different notions about 
advancement and I have my notions about it. Advance may also mean 
no law — anarchy — that also may happen. I think I have dealt with 
all the points that have been raised by the various speakers on their 
amedments. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Are you not perpetuating the caste 
system by accepting the proposal that caste panchayats should decide 
divorce cases? 

Dr. Ambedkar : Why talk about it when we have not reached it ? 
We have not reached that. We shall see it then. For the moment I 
have dealt with all the points and given reasons why it is not possible 
to accept any of the amendments proposed by hon. Members. The only 
amendment that I am prepared to accept is the amendment moved by 
Dr. Bakshi Tek Chand by which he proposes to substitute the word 
“followers” for “members”. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : May I have your permission to correct;. a 
‘mistake which has crept into the debate in the speech of Dr. Ambedkar ? 
(Interruption ). 

Mr, Deputy Speaker : If he makes any particular mistake it is for 
him to correct it. The hon. Member will point it out to me. It is not 
necessary to speak on that. Exception of that kind can be taken to 
whatever he has said in his speech but it is not our business to go on 
correcting the speeches. 

There are a number of amendments that have been tabled. Hon. 
Members might have forgotten what the amendments are that have 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1176 

1176 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

been moved. I have, therefore, put these amendments into groups according 
to the subject matter and also according to the clauses. 

The Minister of Works, Production and Supply (Shri Gadgil): 

There are two amendments moved to this clause by the Hon. Minister 
himself. 

Dr. Ambedkar : There are only two amendments. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am referring to all the amendments. Certainly, 
those amendments which the Hon. Minister has himself moved and the 
one standing in the name of Dr. Tek Chand which the Hon. Minister is 
willing to accept, will be borne in mind. It is my duty to place before 
the House what exactly the amendments are on which they are called 
upon to vote for or against. Instead of going into the details, and for 
purpose of convenience, I shall put the amendments in each group one 
by one. I shall take the group : “application to all Indians compulsorily”, 
that is not only to Hindus but Buddhists, Jains, non-Hindus, Muslims, 
Christians etc. who come under the operation of this Bill. 

The question is: 

For clause 2, substitute : 

“2. Application of Code. — (1) This Code applies to all Hindus. 

(2) The expression ‘Hindu ‘in this Code shall, unless otherwise provided, 
mean a citizen of India. 

(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Special Marriage Act, 
1872 (III of 1872), this Code shall apply to Hindus, as defined in that 
Act, and whose marriages have not been solemnized under the provisions 
of that Act prior to the commencement of this Code.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

For clause 2, substitute : 

“2. This Code applies to all Indians irrespective of their religion, 
caste, or creed.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Shri Jhunjhunwala’s amendment for substitution 
of clause 2 is barred as the House has already decided upon this. 

Then, I come to the other set: that this Code should apply only to 
those who make a declaration, and even then, the parts that are declared 
should apply. 


The question is : 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1177 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1177 


For clause 2, substitute: 

“2. Application of Code . — This Code or any part or parts thereof applies 
to all the citizens of India that is Bharat, who after attaining the age of 
majority, declare in writing that they shall be governed by this Code or 
any part or parts thereof, as the case may be, and get such declaration 
registered in accordance with rules prescribed for the purpose by the 
Central Government.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The next two amendments of Shri J. R. Kapoor 
also go with his amendment negatived just now. They are also therefore 
deemed to be negatived. Then, the question is: 

In the amendment proposed by Shri Banarsi Prasad Jhunjhunwala, in 
the proposed proviso to clause 2, for the words beginning with “unless 
such persons” to the end, substitute: 

“unless such person, after attaining the age of majority, declares in 
writing that he or she, as the case may be, shall be governed by this 
Code, and gets such declaration registered in accordance with rules 
prescribed for the purpose by the Central Government.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is: 

To clause 2, add the proviso : 

“Provided however, that notwithstanding anything contained in the 
above clauses, this Code shall not apply to any person, unless such person 
got his name registered with such authority, and in such manner, as 
may be hereafter prescribed by Parliament, within one year after this 
Code comes into force, and in case of a minor within one year after such 
minor attains majority.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is: 

To clause 2, add the proviso: 

“Provided that the provisions of Parts II or/and VII relating to marriage 
and divorce, and succession shall not apply to any person unless such 
person, after attaining the age of majority declares in writing that he 
or she, as the case may be, shall be governed by the said provisons, and 
gets such declaration registered in accordance with rules prescribed for 
the purpose by the Central Government. 

Provided further that the provisions of Part II relating to marriage 
and divorce shall apply to such declarant only when both the bride and 
bridegroom before the marriage, or both the husband and wife after the 
marriage, make such a declaration.” 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1178 


1178 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The motion was negatived. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Sir, in view of the changed circumstances of the 
case, I would request leave of the House to withdraw my amendments 
Nos. 97 and 272. But all the same I would like to move at a later stage, 
an amendment, when we know how exactly this Part stands when we 
have gone over the whole of this chapter relating to marriage and divorce. 

The amendments were, by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Then there is amendment No. 336 standing 
in the name of Shri J. R. Kapoor. Does he want me to put it ? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Yes, Sir. and I hope the Hon. Law Minister will 
please go over it and see what it means, otherwise there will be difficulty 
in enforcing what he wants to enforce. 

Mr. Deput-Speaker : Why at this stage. All persuation has already 
been done. 

The question is : 

In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, printed 
as No. 3 in the proposed amendment to clause 2, after part (1), insert: 

“(1A) in sub-clause (3) for the words ‘the provisions’ the words ‘any 
or more of the provisions’ be substituted.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, printed 
as No. 3, in the proposed amendment to clause 2, after part (1) insert: 

“(1A) in sub-clause (3) insert at the end ‘in respect of any or more of 
the matters dealt with herein’.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Now I take another topic — inclusion or exclusion 
of categories of people. 

The question is: 

In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, printed 
as No. 3, in part (1) (ii) of the proposed amendment to sub-clause (1) of 
clause 2, after “Sikh religion” add : 

“or to any other religion or faith except Muslim Christian, Parsi or 
Jew religion.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is: 

In part (d) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, at the end, add: 

“subject to his rights and liabilities before his conversion.” 

The motion was negatived. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1179 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1179 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is: 

After part (d) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, add: 

“(e) to a Muslim or Christian converted from Budhism, Jainism, Sikhism or 

Hinduism in his life time.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is: 

Omit part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2. 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment No. 274, which also stands in the 
name of Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad is the same as the one just now negatived 
by the House. That need not be put. 

Then, the question is: 

For part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, substitute : 

“(b) to any person who is a Jaina by religion.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

In part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, for “Jaina or Sikh” substitute ; 
“or Jaina”. 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendments Nos. 101 and 102 are only earlier 
amendments which are the same as the amendments which have been just 
now negatived by the House. I need not put them. 

The question is : 

In part (b) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, omit “or Sikh”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The queston is: 

In Clause 2, omit “Sikh”, wherever it occurs. 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is: 

In part (c) (i) of sub-clause (1) after “illegitimate” insert: “who, if he has 
attained the age of eighteen years, is himself a Hindu and” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is: 

In part (c) (ii) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, after “belongs or belonged” insert 
“and who, if he has attained the age of eighteen years, is himself Hindu”. 

The motion was negatived. 

[1-00 P. M.] 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment No. 277 is barred by a previous 
amendment and therefore need not be put. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1180 


1180 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : My next amendment deserves acceptance. It is 
an improvement in the language. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I will improve my own language. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargave : It is only a grammatical change. 
Instead of the present alone it seeks to include the past also. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The wording in the clause relates to the 
present. There is a difference. It is not a formal amendment. 

The question is : 

In Part (c) (i) of sub-Clause (1) of clause 2, after “parents are” insert 
“or have been”. 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment No. 105 is covered by this and 
need not be put. 

Then, the question is : 

After part (c) (ii) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, add: 

“(iii) to any abandoned child brought up as a member of the community, 
group or family to which such parent belongs 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question : The question is : 

After part (c) (ii) of sub-Clause (1) of clause 2, insert: 

“(iii) to any orphan or abandoned child brought up by the state.” 

The motion was nagatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is: 

After sub-clause (2) of clause 2 insert: 

“(2A) This Code also applies to any woman professing any religion 
who has married a Hindu, buddhist, jain or Sikh.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is: 

Omit sub-clause (2) of clause 2. The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

For sub-clause (2) of clause 2, substitute : 

“(2) This Code also applies to any person, irrespective of his religion, 
who has been governed by the Hindu Law or by any custom or usage as 
part of that law in respect of any matters dealt with herein.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is: 

In sub-clause (2) of clause 2, after “Parsi” insert “Sikh”. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1181 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1181 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

Omit proviso to sub -clause (2) of clause 2. 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

In the proviso to sub-clause (2) of clause 2, for “in respect of those 
matters” occurring at the end, substitute : 

“In respect of matters which that person has not voluntarily chosen.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

After sub-clause (1) of clause 2, insert: 

“(1A) This code shall not apply to the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled 

Tribes.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment No. 281 is barred. I now come to 
amendments of a formal and verbal nature. First I shall put amendment 
No. 3 by Dr. Ambedkar. The question is: 

In clause 2 — 

(1) in sub-clause (1), — 

(1) in part (a) for “Hindus, that is to say, to all persons professing the 
Hindu religion” substitute “persons who are Hindus by religion” ; 

(ii) in part (d), for “Hindu religion” substitute “Hindu, Buddhist, Jaina 
or Sikh religion”; 

(2) Omit sub -clause (4). 

The motion was adopted. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari : Sir, I want to oppose the next amendment of 
Dr. Ambedkar. I think he is making one of the most colossal mistakes 
of his life. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : What is the subject matter ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Mr. Chaudhari is opposed because Dr. Ambedkar 
wants to substitute “tribe or community” for “community” Perhaps 
Dr. Ambedkar’s fear is that “community” may not include a tribe; 
therefore, he wants to make it more specific. 

The question is : 

In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, printed 
as No. 3, after part (1) (i) insert: 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1182 


1182 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“(ia) in part (c) (ii) for “community” substitute ‘tribe or community’,” 

The motion was adopted, 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

In part (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, for “Hindus, that is to say, 
all persons professing the Hindu religion” substitute “persons who are 
Hinuds by religion”. 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

For part (b) of sub -clause (1) of clause 2, substiute: 

“(b) to all persons who are Buddhists, Jains or Sikhs by religion 

The motion was negatived. 

Dr. Deshmukh (Madhya Pradesh) : May I point out that the hon. 
Doctor had suggested that he wants to hold over the final passing of 
the clause ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member was perhaps not present 
when I later on modified that it is only a formal changes in the name — 
whether it should be called Hindu Code or Hindu Marriage and Divorce 
(Amendment) Code. That is only a formal matter. 

Then, the question is : 

In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, printed 
as No. 3, in the proposed amendments to sub-clause (1) of clause 2, after 
part (1) (ii), insert: 

“(iii) insert a new part (e) as follows: 

‘(e) to a convert to any religion or faith after the commencement of 

this code.’ ” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : What about amendment No. 91 moved by 
Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I beg leave to withdraw it. 

The amendment was by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is ; 

In the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. B. R. Ambedkar, printed 
as No. 3, in the proposed amendment to clause 2, after part (1), insert: 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1183 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1183 

“(1A) in the proviso to sub-clause (2), insert at the end ‘unless he 
has declared his consent in the manner prescribed by the Central 
Government in this behalf to be governed by this Code in respect of 
such matters also.’ ” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment No. 93 is barred as it is similar 
to one already negatived. 

Then, the question is: 

Omit sub-clause (3) of clause 2. 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment No. 283, being the same, is 
barred. What about amendment No. 238 moved by Mr. Jaspat Roy 
Kapoor ? Hon. Members must be attentive. 

An Hon. Member : Your amendments are being negatived. 

Shri J. R, Kapoor : I am sorry, Sir but there is this talk going on 
here. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Hon. Member himself speaks and quarreles 
with other Members. 

Shri J. R, Kapoor : Sir, I beg leave to withdraw it. 

The amendment was, by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : What about amendment No. 116 moved by 
Shri Gokulbhai Bhatt ? 

Shri Bhatt : I beg leave to withdraw my amendment. It is not 
necessary. 

The amendment was, by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : 

Then, the question is: 

Omit sub-clause (4) of clause 2. 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment No. 284, being the same, is 
barred. The next amendment is No. 118 of Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad 
that after sub-clause (4) of clause 2, a new sub-clause be added, 
namely : “(5) Notwithstanding anything in this section this Code shall 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1184 


1184 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

apply only to such areas or to such persons or classes of persons in any State 
... etc.”. This has been held over to clause 1. Amendment Nos. 118 and 285 
go together and they are held over. I would suggest to the hon. Member 
that if he wants to have these taken up in connection with clause 1 he may 
table a separate amendment. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I shall table a separate amendment to suit 
the context of clause 1. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

For part (d) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, substitute : 

“(d) to a convert to the Hindu religion, subject to his rights and liabilities 
before his conversion.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is: 

To clause 2, add the proviso : 

“Provided however, that notwithstanding anything contained in the above 
clauses, this Code shall not apply to such person as will get his or her name 
registered with such authority and in such manner, as may be hereafter prescribed 
by Parliament, within five years after this Code comes into force and in case 
of a minor within five years after such a minor attains majority, to the effect 
that he or she does not want to be governed by this Code.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is: 

To clause 2, add the proviso : 

“Provided however, that notwithstanding anything contained in this section 
this Code shall not apply to any person unless such person got his name 
registered, signifying his will to be governed by this Code, with such authority 
and in such manner as may be prescribed.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is ; 

To clause 2, add the proviso : 

“Provided further that notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this Act, 
no provision of this Act shall apply to any one unless a referendum thereupon 
has been taken in the State to which he belongs and the Legislature of the 
State thereafter has decided in accordance with the result of the referendum 
that the provisions of this Act shall apply to the residents of the State. 
Further, that, thereafter, it shall be open to anyone to declare that he shall not 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1185 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1185 

be governed by this Act and the same shall then not apply to him.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is; 

In part (a) of sub-clause (1) of clause 2, after “including’ insert 
“Buddhists, Jains, Sikhs”. 

The motion was negatived. 

Pandit Malaviya : I do not press my next amendment. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Now, we have disposed of all the amendments. 
Is there any Hon. Member whose amendment I have not put to the 
House ? I take it that there is none. 

The question is : 

That clause 2, as amended, stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 2, as amended, was added to the Bill. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1186 


1186 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

*HINDU CODE—contd. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The House will now proceed with the 
further consideration of the Bill to amend and codify certain branches 
of the Hindu Law, as reported by the Select Committee. Yesterday 
we disposed of Clause 2 ; the major contentious clause is over. I hope 
the other clauses will be passed quickly. 

Clause 3. — ( Definitions ) 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar) : I beg to move: 

In clause 3, — 

(i) for the words “unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context” substitute “unless the context otherwise requires”; 

(ii) renumber the existing items (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) as items (ii), 

(iii), (iv), (v) and insert the following as item (i), namely: 

‘(i ) “Aliyasantana law’ means the system of law applicable to 
persons who, if this Code had not been passed, would have been 
governed by the Madras Aliyasantana Act, 1949 (Madras Act IX 
of 1949);’; 

(iii) in term (iii), as to renumbered, omit “except in sections 41 
and 49”; 

(iv) in the Explanation to item (v), as so renumbered, for “this 
clause” substitute “clause (iv) and (v)” ; 

(v) renumber the existing items (v), (vi), (vii) and (viii) as items 
(viii), (ix), (x) and (xi) and insert, the following as items (vi) and 
(vii) namely : 

‘(vi) “Marumakkattayam law” means the system of law applicable 
to persons — 

(a) who, if this Code had not been passed, would have been 
governed by the Madras Marumakkattayam Act, 1932 (Madras 
Act XXII of 1933), the Travancore Nair Act, H of 1100, the 
Travancore Ezhava Act, III of 1100, the Nanjindad Vellala 
Act, 1101, the Travancore Kshatriya Act, 1108, the Travancore 
Krishnavaka-Marumakkathayee Act, 1115, the Cochin Thiyya 
Act, VIII of 1107 ; the Cochin Nayar Act, XXIX of 1113, or 
the Cochin Marumakkathayam Act, XXXIII of 1113 or 

(b) who belong to any community, the members of which are 
largely domiciled in the State of Trvancore Cochin or Madras, and 
who, if this Code had not been passed, would have been governed 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 21st September 1951, pp. 2974-3008, 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1187 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1187 

by any system of inheritance in which descent is traced through the 
female line; but does not include the Aliyasantana law ; 

(vii) “Nambudri law” means the law applicable to persons who, if this 
Code had not been passed, would have been governed by the Madras 
Nambudri Act, 1932 (Madras Act XXI of 1933), the Cochin Nambudri 
Act (XVII of 1114), or the Travancore Malayala Brahmin Act of 1106 
(Regulation III of 1106); 

(vi) in item (viii) as so renumbered, for “any” substitute “a”. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal) : I think that it would be 
better to proceed seriatim, sub-clause by sub-clause, and subject by subject. 
Otherwise, the difficulty would be that the debate would be of too general 
a nature. In clause 2 the debate was much of a general nature because we 
did not consider individual items or groups. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I agree, I shall proceed in the order in which they 
have been noted in the order Paper. 

Dr. Ambedkar : My amendment is so to say in two parts. Item 1 of my 
amendment is merely a verbal change. It has been pointed out to me that the 
words that are used in the existing clause “unless mere is anything repugnant 
in the subject or context” are not in consonance with the language which we 
have been using since the passing of the Constitution, the Constitution uses 
the phraseology “unless the context otherwise requires” and in order to bring 
the language of this Bill in consonance with the language of the Constitution, 
I am making that particular amendment, it is merely a change of words. 

With regard to the other amendments, they are necessary because it has 
now been proposed that the marriage and divorce law should also apply to 
persons who are governed by the Marmuakkattayam and Aliyasantana law. 
As the subsequent sections deal with that aspect; of the matter, it is necessary 
to enlarge the definition clause so that necessary definitions which relate to 
that matter may be brought in and the definition clause be made complete. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : amendment moved : 

In clause 3, — 

(i) for the words “unless there is anything repugnant in the subject 
or context” substitute “unless the context otherwise requires”; 

(ii) renumber the existing items (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) as items 
(ii), (iii), (iv) and (v),and insert the following as item (i), namely : 

(i) “Aliyasantana law”, means the system of law applicable to 
persons who, if this Code had not been passed, would have been 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1188 


1188 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

governed by the Madras Aliyasantana Act, 1949 (Madras Act 
IX of 1949); 

(iii) in item (iii), as so renumbered, omit “except in sections 44 
and 49”; 

(iv) in the Explanation to item (v), as so renumbered, for “this 
clause” substitute “clauses (iv) and (v)”; 

(v) renumber the existing items (v), (vi), (vii) and (viii) as items 
(viii), (ix), (x) and (xi), and insert the following as items (vi) and 
(vii), namely : 

(vi) “Marumakkattayam law” means the system of law applicable 
to persons — 

(a) who, if this Code had not been passed, would have been 
governed by the Madras Marumakkattayam Act, 1932 (Madras 
Act, XXII of 1933), the Travancore Nair Act, II of 1100, the 
Nanjindad Vellala Act, 1101, the Travancore Kshatriya Act, 
1108, the Travancore Krishnavaka-Marumakkathayee Act, 
1115, the Cochin Thiyya Act, VIII of 1107, the Cochin Nayar 
Act, XXIX of 1113, or the Cochin Marurnakkathayam Act, 
XXXIII of 1113, or 

(b) who belong to any community, the members of which 
are largely domiciled in the State of Travancore-Cochin or 
Madras, and who, if this code had not been passed, would 
have been governed by any system of inheritance in which 
descent is traced through the female line ; 

but does not include the Aliyasantana law ; 

(vii) ‘Nambudri law’ means the law applicable to persons who, if 
this Code had not been passed, would have been governed by the 
Madras Nambudri Act, 1932 (Madras Act XXI of 1933), the Cochin 
Nambudri Act (XVII of 1114), or the Travancore Malayala Brahmin 
Act of 1106 (Regulation III of 1106) ;’ ; 

(vi) in item (viii) as so renumbered, for “any” substitue “a”. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : My amendment No. 410 comes in by way 
of priority according to the subject because this amendment is the real 
clause. My amendment seeks to delete ‘Aliasantana law’. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Hon. Member may move it. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I beg to move: In the amendment proposed 
by Dr. Ambedkar, in part (ii), omit the proposed part (i) of clause 3. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1189 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1189 

Before that I have certain verbal and formal amendments which I 
think, need not be pressed before the House, that is in the amendment 
proposed by the Hon. Minister of Law in item (ii) there is the 
renumbering amendment that runs all through the amendments. If 
we take up the renumberings at this stage it will create confussion, 
and we do not know where we would be. They should be done by the 
Secretary or the Draftsman and therefore I suggest that for the time 
being we should eliminate these renumbering amendments. I have a 
lot of amendments to cure these verbal irregularities, but I do not wish 
to move them because I want to leave them entirely to the Secretary. 

Coming to my amendments, they are for the deletion of the 
definition of Aliyasanatana law and I have other amendments to 
delete the definitions of Marumakkattayam and Nambudri law. The 
reason for moving this amendment is this ; that this is as well as 
other amendments relate to these special laws, which I want to delete 
because this is the policy of the Bill, namely to make no reservation, 
no exceptions in any case. In the case of Sikhs we have decided to 
make no exception. In the case of others we have made no provision 
to exclude them from the operation of the Code. That being the 
accepted principle ... 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I understand the Hon. Minister to say that 
he now proposes to extend all the provisions of this Act to both these 
classes also. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : That means the marriage and divorce 
law laid down in the Bill will also apply to those Hindus who are 
now governed by Aliyasantana, Marumakkattayam and Nambudri 
law separately. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Therefore, the objection is over. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : The objection is that if general provisions 
are to apply to all Hindus so far as marriage and divorce is concerned, 
the definition is absolutely unnecessary ! It is rather misleading. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : We have accepted this. We had included 
others as in the case of Sikhs. There is no need for separate definition. 
The Bill includes it and therefore it is not necessary. Exception is made 
for Aliyasantana and Marumakkattayam law. They are excluded from 
the operation of marriage and divorce laws as envisaged in the Bill. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I do not think they should be excluded 
at all. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1190 


1190 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : That is exactly what the Hon. Law Minister 
is trying to do. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is what I am trying to do. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : By the inclusion of this definition ? If that 
is the specific purpose, then, my amendment is needless. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Originally, those who were governed by the 
Aliyasantana Act and Marumakkattayam law were excluded and they 
were allowed to be regulated by those two laws. The Hon. Law Minister 
now feels that they must also be brought into the frame work of the Act 
so as to bring about uniformity. That is why he is adding this. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : My perplexity arises from the fact that 
even apart from this definition, they will ordinarily be included. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Bill specifically excludes them. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : That portion should be deleted. There is 
repetition. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member began under the wrong 
impression that originally they were included and the Law Minister 
wants to exclude them. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : The exclusion should be by amending the 
general clause; not in the definition. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : That is another matter. As a matter of 
substance, hon. Member’s amendment has absolutely no force. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I quite agree. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Then, why should he look at formal affairs 
and verbal amendments. If it is necessary, let us have this definition 
for the purpose of clarification instead of relegating it to some General 
Clauses Act. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Not the General Clauses Act, but the 
general definition of Hindus under this Act. It should apply to all Hindus. 
This Aliyasantana law governs the Hindus. This is special mention and 
then inclusion. The inclusion is already there. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The backbone of his objection is broken. The 
hon. Member is trying to get at some formal affair. Is it necessary ? 

The Minister of Home Affairs (Shri Rajagopalachari) : I think 
the hon. Member has not realised the actual position. There are two 
ways of excluding certain classes or groups; one by actually ignoring 
them in the whole Code and another by referring to them and providing 
for them as exception. If the Hon. Law Minister has chosen now to 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1191 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1191 

provide for them by making exceptions in the body of the Code, it is 
necessary to deadline them. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is the other way about. He has already 
made exceptions in favour of these and he has povided for exclusion 
from the Bill. 

Shri Rajagopalachari: That is what I have said. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : What he wants to do is to include them. 

Shri Rajagopalchari: I think the hon. Member who has moved the 
amendment is thinking that we have applied the whole Code bodily to 
these people and therefore, since you have defined the Hindus, why 
should you define these people. The answer is, we do not propose to 
apply the provisions in the Code bodily to them but to provide exceptions 
and therefore it is necessary to define who they are. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I fail to appreciate all this fineness. If the 
Code is to apply, it should straight forward be applied to them, instead 
of leaving any exceptions. 

Shri Rajagopalachari: Suppose we applied it to them ; “they” should 
be defined here. That is what is being done. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : It should apply to all; they are already 
included in the definition of Hindus. 

Shri Rajagopalachari: There are exceptional provisions for these 
people. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Let me understand first; without understanding, 
I cannot put it to me House. As the Bill stands at present, clause 51 says : 

“(1) Nothing contained in this Part shall be deemed to affect any 
right conferred by the Madras Marumakkattayam Act, 1932 to obtain 
the dissolution of a sacramental marriage, whether solemnised before 
or after the commencement of this Code.” 

Therefore, under the Bill as it has emerged from the Select Committee, 
Marumakkattayam Law is allowed to apply so far as those persons who 
are governed by this law are concerned. What the Hon. Law Minister 
wants to do is not to create exceptions in favour of any particular class, 
but to bring them all under this Act. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Yes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : That is what Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad wants. 
Originally he was under the impression that an exception is sought to 
be made. He was under the impression that originally those governed 
by the Marumakkattayam law and Aliyasantana law were governed 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1192 


1192 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

by this Code and the Hon. Law Minister wanted to make exceptions and 
that is what he objects to. Now that he knows that the original Act made an 
exception and they are being brought under it, he withdraws his objection, 
but he clutches, — let me withdraw that word — he wants to raise a formal 
thing, regarding the definition of Marumakkattayam and Aliyasantana. The 
substance has gone. Why should he worry himself over these formal things ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: Clause 51 should be deleted. That would be 
enough. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That is a matter of procedure. 

Dr. Ambedkar: We will come to that later on. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: We will come to that later on. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : There are special provisions in this Bill for 
all these people. That should be dropped. The definition should also be 
dropped. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: There is no harm in making it clear. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: It would only be showing one’s nose in a 
round about way. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Aliyasantana law is not a general law going into 
the customs and other things. This is a Code. 

The Minister of State for Transport and Railways (Shri 
Santhanam): After we have finished the whole thing, if any substantial 
provision of Aliyasantana Act does not come in, then we can revert to this, 
if it is superfluous. It is better to start with a definition because some 
provisions as they stand has reference to it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I suppose the hon. Member Mr. Naziruddin 
does not see any necessity for this. As a matter of fact, his point has been 
put forward in the Hon. Law Ninister’s amendment. Therefore, all the 
amendments standing in the name of Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad are not moved. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : No, no. 

Deputy Speaker : Amendment No. 372 is a formal one, I shall take the 
responsibility for re-numbering. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Amendment 410 is not pressed. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Then, there are amendments 374 and 375. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I press amendment No. 374. But, my 
amendment No. 377 comes earlier. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member may move it. So far as formal 
amendments are concerned with regard to brackets, etc., I shall instruct 
the office about them. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1193 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1193 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I shall not move then any more at all. 
That is quite enough. I Move Amendment No. 377. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab): Am I to take it that you 
have exhausted sub-clause (i) ? I have got an amendment. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Let me first finish the first clause. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargaya: I have no objection if Mr. Naziruddin 
Ahmad claims to move all his amendments first. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: It is not a claim; it would be more 
convenient. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Let me first dispose of sub-clause (i) of clause 3. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I beg to move; In part (i) of clause 
3, for the words “among Hindus” substitute the words “among persons 
to whom this Code applies.” 

I do not want to make any speech as the thing is very apparent. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment moved : 

In part (i) of clause 3, for the words “among Hindus” substitute the 
words “among persons to whom this Code applies.” 

Shri Santhanam : Clause 2, sub-clause (3) covers this point fully.; 
‘Hindus’ means all people to whom this Code applies. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: This House has already adopted the definition. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I know that. But, nothing is lost if 
we use these words which are very expressive. Suppose a person reads 
any other section ; then, he has to know what me definition is. Unless 
he keeps the definition in mind, he would not be able to know to whom 
this Code applies. These words express the meaning fully. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Even then, he has to revert back to the 
meaning of persons to whom this Code applies. We are only using and 
expanded definition. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : ‘Persons to whom this Code applies’: 
he has to take this definition everywhere. This is more particular. I 
leave it to the House. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am only trying to know whether it is a 
matter of substance on which greater emphasis should be laid or a 
formal thing. Anyhow, I take it as moved. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I beg to move: 

In part (i) omit the words “and uniformity”. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1194 


1194 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Santhanam : I want to get one point clear. Does the hon. Member 
suggest that if there was a custom one thousand years ago in a particular 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I have not yet spoken on my amendment, 
and my hon. Friend there is already opposing it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : No, the mover only means that uniformity is a 
difficult matter for the whole of India. Amendment moved: 

In part (i) omit the words “and uniformity”. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : With your permission I shall move my 
other amdendment also : 

In part (i) of clause 3, — 

(a) after the words “group or family” occurring in line 4, add the following; 

“or any rule which is certain not unreasonable and has been judicially 
recognised as valid and binding in any local area, tribe, community, group 
or family” ; and 

(b) Omit the first proviso. 

If you will allow me, I shall argue out my point in moving these amendments. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Not now, I shall come back to the hon. Member. 
Amendment moved : 

In part (i) of clause 3, — 

(a) after the words “group or family “occurring in line 4, add the following : 

“or any rule, which is certain not unreasonable and has been judicially 
recognised as valid and binding in any local area, tribe, community, group 
or family”; and 

(b) Omit the first proviso. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala (Bihar): I want to move my amendment No. 413 
in a slightly modified form, using the word “varna” for the word “caste” 
occurring there. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It rather confuses me if the word “sub-clause” is used 
when referring to these parts or items of the clauses. In matters of this 
sort, we speak of items. They are referred to as item 1 and item 2 and so 
on. There are no sub-clause to these clauses. They may please be referred 
to as entries or items. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There are these clauses and then these sub-clauses 
and so I 

Shri Santhanam : No, Sir, Sub-clauses are numbered as usual. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Whatever word may be adopted, it is better to avoid the 
word “sub-clause”. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1195 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1195 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: All right. I shall use the word “entry” or “part”. 
Here Mr. Jhunjhunwala wants to modify his amendment by changing the 
word “caste” into “varna ” — as was suggested by the Law Minister yesterday. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala: I beg to move : 

In part (i) after the word “tribe” insert the word “varna”. 

I would, also like to move my amendment No. 414 with a slight 
modification, omitting the words coming after the words “principle castes”, 
I beg to move : 

After part (i) insert the following new part: 

“(ia) the word “vama” means according to the context in each case four 
principle “vainas”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Amendment moved: 

After part (i) insert the following new part: 

“(ia) the word” “Varna” means according to the context in each case 
four principle “varnas”. 

Shri R. K. Chaudhari (Assam): I beg to move: 

Omit the Provisions to part (i) of clause 3. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment moved : 

Omit the provisions to part (i) of clause 3. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar): I also want to move the amendment. 
We both of us have given notice of the amendment jointly. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I do not attach much importance to the moving 
of the amendment by all the Members. But if the hon. Member wants to 
withdraw any amendment, then I will see that the other hon. Member 
has his say or if the hon. Member is absent, then the other hon. Member 
will be able to withdraw it. 

Captain A. P. Singh (Vindhya Pradesh): I want to move my amendment 
No. 378, dealing with part (viii). 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: We have not come up to that part. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: You were pleased to say that you would 
first deal with all amendments belonging to one category or group. I 
suggest that only the amendments dealing with the definition of one thing 
be taken up now, discussed and disposed of and then we go to another 
set of amendments dealing with another point. Otherwise it will lead to 
difficulties. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: That is exactly what I am doing. We are now 
dealing with amendments to only part (i) — “Custom” and “usage.” 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1196 


1196 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Bhatt (Bombay): I have tabled an amendment which must have 
reached you. It is about custom and usage. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Well, what is it ? 

Shri Bhatt: It is about part (i). 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: But I have not got a copy. I would not like the 
House to be taken by surprise. At least the mover of the Bill should be 
given a copy of the amendment sufficiently in advance and also a copy 
sent to me. That is the minimum I expect. We should not be taken by 
surprise. 

Shri Bhatt: I thought you would probably have got a copy of it from 
the office as I got one just half an hour ago. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: When was it delivered ? 

Shri Bhatt: This morning. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I do realise that some amendments may 
10 A M have to be allowed either from the Government side or the 
other side at the last moment. But I would suggest to hon. 
Members that at least the Law Minister must be given previous intimation 
of such amendments and a copy also sent to me. I will rigorously adopt 
this rule so far as new amendments are concerned. They should be 
agreed to by all sections of the House. 

Shri Bhatt: For part (i) of it I have proposed I beg to move: For part 
(i) of Clause 3, substitute the following : 

“(i) the expressions ‘custom’ and ‘usage’ signify any rule which having 
been in vogue for a long time, has obtained the force of law among Hindus 
in any local area, caste, sub-caste, tribe, community, group or family : 

Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable; and Provided 
further that in the case of a rule applicable only to a family it has not 
been discontinued by the family,”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: What is the difference between this and that? 

Shri Bhatt: That I have taken out of it. A portion of it has been 
retained. That is why I have drafted this amendment in this way. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment moved : 

For part (i) of Clause 3, substitute the following : 

“(i) the expressions “custom’ and ‘usage’ signify any rule which having 
been in vogue for a long time, has obtained the force of law among Hindus 
in any local area, caste, sub-caste, tribe, community, group or family : 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1197 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1197 

Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable; and 

Provided further that in the case of a rule applicable only to a family 

it has not been discontinued by the family.”. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: The amendment moved by Shri R. K. 
Chaudhari relates to part 2 and not one. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It refers to the clause as it stand now. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : In connection with my amendment 
Nos. 444 and 446 I would like to make some general observations regarding 
custom. The sole basis for the present Code is that such customs and laws 
as are opposed to the principle to be enacted in the Code will be abrogated 
for all time. I take it that the central principle of this codification is that 
all various customs in all parts of the country will, as a matter of fact, 
be so unified by the provisions of the Act that one law shall be applicable 
to the whole of India for the communities concerned. I have accepted that 
basis as good and I am in favour of the codification, because our laws 
will then become certain and they will become applicable to all Hindus 
all over India. 

Apart from the unification of the customs sought to be done by the 
Code, there are many customs and laws which .we want to see changed. 
It is not only an attempt at codification. It is certainly a code in which 
we want all our bad customs and laws to be modified and hence in that 
respect it is a reform Bill also. I am in favour of the provisions of the Bill 
because I think they are a great advance upon the present practices and 
they imply reforms of a very great degree among the laws and customs 
now obtaining among the Hindus. 

But when I find Dr. Ambedkar agreeing to this or that custom coming 
into the Bill I feel that the essential principle on which the Code is based 
is being sacrificed to opportunism. I know that he is. in a great fix and 
I have nothing but sympathy for him. Left to himself I am sure he will 
not accept these customs. Left to myself I would behave in the same way 
and there is no difference so far as this attitude is concerned between 
him and myself 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : We are now on the definitions only. Such matters 
as sapinda, sagotra or degrees, in regard to which whether custom ought 
to be allowed to prevail, we will deal with them, we come to individual 
cases. Is it the hon. Member’s intention that the definition of Customs 
should go ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: The definition of the word 
“custom” will govern the word wherever it appears in the subsequent 
clauses. That word will have the meaning which we assign here. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1198 


1198 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Therefore it is very necessary to understand the significance of the 
word “custom” and see how it affects our principles. For us to know the 
full meaning of the word it is neccessary that we realise how we are 
altering the entire provisions of the Code, when we define “customs” 
in the manner proposed. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member is sufficiently an elderly 
Parliamentarian to know things but I want to understand things for 
myself. When individual items such as marriage or divorce come up 
we shall see what further changes have to be made in respect of that 
particular portion. We might say “Notwithstanding this, this shall not 
be allowed, etc.” We are now on the definition and let us not enlarge 
the scope and discuss every one of the entries and see how such and 
such custom will work hardship. That would mean another general 
discussion. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I understood you Sir, even without 
the exposition which you have been kind enough to make. I quite see the 
force of the point you have made. You are here only defining customs 
but whatever definition is given here will apply to all those customs 
which are allowed in respect to certain matters. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Not necessarily. With regard to the Sikhs 
or some others we might say “Notwithstading, this custom shall not 
prevail”. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : What is the meaning of our saying 
that customs in regard to the incidents of marriage will prevail ? It 
means that a certain kind of rule shall prevail and that rule or principle 
we are defining here, whether it should be such as is opposed to public 
policy but all the same one which has got the force of law. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : As to how custom ought to be recognised, 
if hon. Members want to impose restrictions it is certainly within the 
scope without going into the details of the various customs prevailing. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am not on details at the moment. 
When the occasion arises we shall see whether the custom should be 
allowed to prevail in respect to those matters. Here I am making only 
general observations and submitting to Dr. Ambedkar 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The general observation that there shall 
be no customs and so forth could come at the first and second stage. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I am not saying that no custom 
should be allowed. I am only saying that he should not be very liberal 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1199 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1199 

and allow many kinds of customs which will take away from the effect 
of the Bill. Then it would mean that there would be no use having 
this Code if in respect of every matter you allow a custom to prevail. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : We are once again going into the details. It 
is one thing to say that hereafter no custom at all will prevail, only 
the law will prevail. But it is another thing to say that we have to 
allow certain customs. In that case when we go into the details we 
will find out what ought to be allowed and what customs ought not 
to be allowed. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I am restricting the scope of 
customs by this definition. Supposing only those customs as have been 
judicially recognised are to be allowed, that would certianly restrict the 
scope of custom. Otherwise if we leave custom undefined when a man 
is faced with difficulty and produce any amount of evidence ; custom 
can be proved not only by instances but by opinions, by reference to 
texts. Therefore, I want that so far as custom is concerned its scope 
may be restricted. It is not that I have only taken one case and put 
it for the consideration of Dr. Ambedkar. I have gone further and just 
to show the absurdity of how he is allowing so much liberalisation 
of customs, I have given certain amendments to show to him and to 
impress upon him that he should proceed cautiously. Therefore, my 
amendment No. 446 says: 

“or any rule which is certain not unreasonable and has been judicially 
recognised as valid and binding in any local area, tribe, community, 
group or family”. 

I can understand that there are some customs which are growing, 
some which have been crystallised. As regards those which are growing, 
we want that they may not grow because that is the only way of 
having a statutory rule effective. In regard to customs which have not 
been judicially recognised, my own view is that we should not bring 
them within the scope. Either we accept that the society should accept 
custom as the sole rule of conduct and there should be no other rule 
among the Hindu community as was the case before — in that case also 
we will reach a stage when custom will become so stereotyped that 
we will attain what we want to — or, in the other case when we want 
to impose the rule of thumb, when we want to lay down by statute 
that such-and-such shall be the rule. Anyhow we will be well advised 
if we recognise customs which have been judicially recognised. In the 
definition given, it would appear there is no mention of any judicial 
recognition of any customs. On the contrary, the words in the first 
proviso are : 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1200 


1200 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“that the rule is certain and not unreasonable or opposed to public 

policy”. 

I am opposed to the wording, “opposed to public policy”. I do not 
know what the “public policy” is. So far as monogamy is concerned, I 
understand the public policy to be that the Government seems to be of the 
view the monogamy is a good thing for Hindus but then for rest of the 
community it does not apply ; as regards my Mussalman friends, many 
of whom I know do not like polygamy still the government is undecided 
and has taken shelter under the specious plea that they have not been 
consulted. If a thing is opposed to public policy, it is so for all. I know 
of a custom in the Punjab where kharva marriages are allowed. They 
cannot be called absolutely bigamous, but at the same time they are a 
different edition of bigamy because after the man dies the devar of the 
woman, that is the younger brother of the deceased husband, though 
his spouse may be living, is allowed to marry that widow ; the property 
remains with the family, and the lady also remains with the family. So, 
opposed to public policy might mean anything. It is so flexible a term 
that it shall vary with the length of the foot of the Law Minister, I am 
therefore opposed to these words. I would rather like mat any custom 
which has been judicially recognised, which has stood the test of time 
should be recognised. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Hereafter there will not be any custom. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : My submission is that in regard 
to this matter in which the Hindu Code seeks to provide, there should 
be no custom ; otherwise the whole purpose of the Code will disappear. 
You are perfectly right, Sir, when you say that in future there will be 
no custom on matters on which the Hindu Code provides, but in regard 
to other matters, so far as the Hindu Code does not relate to those 
matters at all 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: What will happen if there is a particular 
custom which is undisputed ? It need not come to court. Only a disputed 
custom comes to court and is recognised or not. Any custom which is not 
obnoxious to public policy is recognised by the community. Merely on 
account of not having been recognised by a court does it lose its stand ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: My submission is that if there 
is provision for it in the Code then it does not grow. If there is no 
provision then it will remain and grow, and even if you took away 
these words “opposed to public policy” still it will remain because 
it is a rule of law. If you put the words “opposed to public policy” 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1201 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1201 

then, in spite of the fact that a custom is a good one and observed by 
great numbers in the community, it will not grow if somebody is able 
to say that it is opposed to public policy. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Hon. Member is a good lawyer. My own 
interpretation is different. Wherever this Code specifically provides for 
a particular thing, unless an exception is made, to that extent a custom 
is abrogated whether it be opposed to public policy or not. What is the 
difficulty under which the hon. Member is labouring ? There are certain 
customs which have to be recognised, certain customs which are obnoxious 
and so opposed to public policy. Public policy is only a matter which can 
be judged by the foot of the judge. In regard to those matters we can 
say, why leave them to the court to decide; those customs are absolutely 
obnoxious. But with regard to other customs why say that they ought 
to be recognised by a court ? I think it is impossible to legislate for all 
the things. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Perhaps you will allow me to intervene for a minute 
or two to clarify the point. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am, Sir, of the same view as was 
expressed by you, but I am expressing it in a different way. I do not 
want to tamper with the customs which are growing which are good 
customs, but my fear is that any court may take upon itself to say 
that it is opposed to public policy. All the customs are not treated here 
because we have not the time and energy to go into all the customs 
throughout the country. Because we cannot say what customs will be 
saved, we should say that a custom to be recognised shall have to be 
judicially recognised as not opposed to public policy. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The question which has been raised by my friend 
Pandit Bhargava is no doubt very important and so far as I know 
there is not the slightest difference between the view that I take and 
the view that he takes. The only thing is that he has applied his 
mind, if I may say so, to a wrong clause and that is why he has been 
rather confused as to what exactly is the position. Those Members of 
the House who are interested in the subject of custom versus the Code 
had better begin to apply their mind not to clause 3 but to clause 4 
which is the main clause which deals with this matter of authority 
of custom as against the authority of the code and the law. And you 
will find, Sir, a very clear statement therein that unless a custom 
has been expressly saved that custom will not have any operation as 
against this law. Therefore, the question whether any particular custom 
has been expressly saved or not has to be gone into when we come 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1202 


1202 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to discuss each of the clauses of this particular Bill whereon Members 
may raise the question whether the particular clause should stand in 
the absolute way in which it has been drafted or whether it should be 
made subject to any particular custom. If any particular clause in this 
Bill does not say “Save as otherwise provided by custom” or “unless 
there is a custom to the contrary” there is no custom which this Bill 
proposes to recognise. Therefore, on that point there ought to be no 
doubt. There is not the slightest intention to allow custom to override 
in a general way the provisions of this Code. 

My. hon. Firend has, I know, a particular question or an occasion 
in mind when he feels that I have been going rather soft on this 
particular subject, but I can tell him that it is only in very very rare 
cases that I propose to yield on this subject, subject to the fact that 
anyone who presses upon me that the custom should override this 
particular Code in any particular way will carry upon him the burden 
of showing that that custom is more progressive than the provisons 
of this particular Bill. 

Now, supposing that we do introduce a qualifying statement when we 
come to deal with different subjects, i.e. we say that that clause shall 
be subject to any existing custom or something like that, even then 
the question remains : What is the standard to which that particular 
custom must conform before it can have that over-riding effect ? It 
is that question which is dealt with in the definition clause, so that 
whenever any custom is saved it will nonetheless be open to find out 
whether the custom which is allowed by the particular clause to prevail 
upon a provision of this Bill conforms to the definition which is really 
a definition laying down the standard to which a custom must reach 
before it can be accepted by the court. That is the position. 

So far as (ii) of clause 3 is concerned, there is nothing in this 
clause which is not bodily taken from the judicial pronouncements of 
the different High Courts in our country which have had to consider 
what is the custom to which they will give their sanction, and I think 
the ingredients of custom which the courts have laid down have been 
bodily and literally embodied in (ii) of clause 3. So, I do not think 
there is any ground for quarelling with the definition, because the 
definition is necessary. Even where we allow custom to prevail, we 
do not allow any kind of custom to prevail but only custom which 
conforms to the standards which have been laid down by the High 
Courts and hon. Members will see that the standards laid down in (ii) 
are the standards which have been sanctified and laid down by the 
various courts in our country. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1203 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1203 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Even in foreign courts this is so. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Everywhere this is the same. I have looked up even 
Stephen’s Digest of English law and I find that the wording is almost 
the same as we have got here. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am very much oblidged to my 
Hon. Friend the Law Minister for his having kindly explained. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : (Uttar Pradesh) : Has the hon. Member not 
finished ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : No. He will continue. He is on his legs. 
Incidentally not only Members of Parliament but also outsiders are 
watching the progress of this Bill and there is some misunderstanding 
about my position. Once I sit here I have absolutely no colour, no caste, 
no creed. That is my honest position. To the best of my conscience I 
have tried to discharge my duties impartially. If any hon. Member feels 
rightly or wrongly that I am not doing it properly, I always welcome his 
coming and telling me privately that I must do this and that. 

I find that even hon. Members of this House are under the impression 
that when an hon. Member is on his legs I can ask him to sit down. I 
have been appealing to hon. Members that with respect to important 
matters, certainly sufficient lattitude and time is necessary and must be 
allowed but if they repeat matters which have been discussed at various 
stages that is not right. Barring that, I am not in a position to impose 
any time restriction. If the Hon. Minister of Law can tell me that I can 
impose any time restriction on speeches under the law, it will be only 
too glad to avail of it. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It cannot be done. But we have agreed amongst 
ourselves to impose a self-abnegation ordinance. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am very glad of that, but the burden should 
not be cast on the Chair. In a Finance Bill, I can apply the guillotine. 
This has been newly introduced. Hitherto the guillotine was applied to 
only Budget Grants, but recently it has been introuced so far as Finance 
Bills are concerned. I can fix a time limit and all amendments will be 
lost unless they are moved and accepted or rejected before that time- 
limit. But with respect to other Bills, I have no right to fix a time-limit 
even with respect to the Bill as a whole. With this restriction, I feel 
very much embarrassed if any hon. Member thinks that I am allowing 
too much time. That is my position and the position of anybody who 
may be in the Chair. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1204 


1204 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Lastly, if any hon. Member feels that there has been sufficient 
discussion on a particular clause, he can kindly tell me. There of 
course, I have my discretion. If I too feel that the matter has been 
elaborately discussed or at any rate sufficiently discussed, I will 
agree to the closure motion. To that extent, there is discretion in 
me. hon. Members who make suggestions will kindly bear all these 
things in mind. I am making this statement because an impression 
is created out-side that notwithstanding the suggestions of hon. 
Members I am standing in the way and holding the pendulum back. 

In this connection, may I also inform the House that I have 
received a letter from the Managing Editor of the Indian News 
Chronicle ? Yesterday, as the House will recall Shri Amolak Chand 
drew my attention to a cartoon appearing in this paper which 
described some Members as holding the minute hand and hour 
hand and withholding the progress of the clock, and the Deputy 
Speaker as catching hold of the pendulum firmly so that the clock 
cannot move this side or that side. The hon. Members are shown 
as looking up and not looking down and seeing as to who is the 
man that is really holding the clock back. That is the impression 
that was created by that cartoon. Since I made reference to this 
matter yesterday and it is practically a privilege of the House 
and I am only its spokesman, I would like to read this letter. 
It is written by Shri Deshbandhu Gupta, Managing Editor and 
runs thus : 

“My dear Shri Ananthasayanam Ayyangar. 

I am informed that you took exception to the cartoon which 
appeared in the Indian News Chronicle yesterday morning under 
the caption “putting the Clock Back”. You are reported to have 
expressed the view that the cartoon was calculated to cast aspertions 
on the Chair. I am very sorry that the cartoon has given cause for 
offence to you personally or in the capacity of the Deputy Speaker. 
The cartoonist assures me that it was remotest from his intention 
to show any disrespect to the Chair or to the House and joins me in 
assuring you of the desire of the Indian News Chronicle to uphold 
the dignity of both. 

The theme of the cartoon as you will kindly see is to illustrate the 
current situation in Parliament in which in spite of the Chairman’s 
desire to regulate the debate so as to conform as nearly as possible 
to time schedule, some members participating in the debates have 
endeavoured to prolong the debate and thereby hold the progress of 
the Bill. I am assured by the cartoonist that in introducing the Deputy 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1205 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1205 

Speaker in the cartoon in this role he had no other intention. While 
regretting that anything in the cartoon should have given cause to you 
for offence. I hope you will be good enough to accept this explanation 
and our sincere assurance that there was no intention whatsoever of 
showing disrespect to the Chair and the House.” 

I think this is sufficient. 

Dr. Deshmukh : From the Chair, he has shifted to Members. He is 
accusing Members now. It is worse. 

Shri Radhelal Vyas : (Madhya Bharat) : I think the matter should 
be referred to a Committee of Privileges. 

Shri Bhatt : It should be made clear that it was not intended to cast 
aspersion on any Member either. 

Dr. Deshmukh : Shri Deshbandhu Gupta should be made to appologise 
to the House. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Evidently he feels that the speed which he 
expects of the progress of the Bill has not been made in this case. I shall 
later look into the matter as to whether any aspersion or insinuation 
has been cast on any hon. Members of this House. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : So far as your observations are 
concerned, with your permission I would like to say a word. The Members 
of this House realise that the Chair is sacred. Here sat Vithalbhai 
Patel — whose portrait we see before us — who sanctified the Chair. After 
him was it adorned by men of great eminence and prominence. We all 
know that the Chair has been holding the scales even. It is idle for the 
outside world or any members here to think or feel that the Chair is 
not impartial or dealing fairly with any question. 

But at the same time when passions are frayed, when persons take 
sides, they are apt to see from an unbalanced standpoint the conduct 
of the Chair or of the Members of this House. Now great exception was 
taken by some Members, and they even asked you to stop a Member 
during the course of his speech. I can fully understand the view-point of 
every Member who wants to make a long speech. Even Dr. Ambedkar 
made certain statements to which certain Members took exception, though 
I was not one of them. Every Member has a right to criticise. So far as 
we are concerned our skins are too thick now to get offended by such 
criticism. So far as the conduct of the Chair in this House is concerned, 
no member has for a moment even thought that it is conducting the 
business in a partial manner. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1206 


1206 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The newpapers have a right to criticise anybody and everybody. I 
personally would not mind if any pressman criticises me. Let them 
criticise — they have their own point of view. Let us not be so thin-skinned, 

So far as aspersions on the Chair are concerned, by any person either 
inside or outside the House, I would take strong exception and if you 
feel that the apology offered is not satisfactory, you should take action 
against the person concerned. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : So far as I am concerned, I am satisfied with 
what he has written. It is, therefore, unnecessary to pursue the matter. 
If, however, any hon. Member feels that this letter casts any aspersion 
on him, we shall look into it. At present I do not think any aspersion 
is cast on any hon. Member or on the House. 

Shri Santhanam : Is it suggested that only Government is liable to 
criticism and not the Members ? 

Dr. Deshmukh : While Mr. Gupta wrote the letter with the intention 
of clarifying his position so far as the cartoon was concerned, he has 
unnecessarily gone out of his way to criticise a section of the Members 
by alleging that they were obstructing this measure. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : This letter consists of two parts. So far as 
the Chair is concerned and the privilege of the House is concerned, the 
matter may be left to me. I am satisfied with what he has written. If, 
however, any hon. Member feels that it casts any aspersion on him, he 
may meet me in my chamber and we shall discuss the matter. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : What objection could be taken to 
that ? Mr. Deshbandhu himself took four hours on the Press Bill; our 
friend Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad took seven hours on this Bill. 

Dr. Deshmukh : It is a case of the pot calling the kettle black. 

In regard to what you said about yourself and the conduct of business 
in the House. I want to say a word with your permission and that is 
this. Whereas I sincerely welcome all your interruptions and the help 
you give for the conduct of the business of the House, I would like to 
point out with all due respect, that if the debate is allowed to go on, 
probably we might spend lesser time. I have the utmost respect for the 
Chair and it intervenes only with the idea of helping the proceedings. 
But if it could be minimised and help given only when it is necessary, 
we will probably be able to advance better. 

Shri Bharati (Madras) : It is a direction to the Chair which is 
uncalled for. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1207 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1207 

Dr. Deshmukh : The Chair has invited our opinion. 

Shri Bharati : Not for giving directions to the Chair. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : As a Member of this House I wish 
that this rule of free speech is stuck to. I do not want to put any obstacles 
in the progress of this Bill. All the same I feel very much offended if I 
feel an inner urge to speak more and more and yet the Chair pulls me 
up and does not allow me to speak fully. All Members are expected to 
put a self-restraint on themselves. Now, I come to the subject. 

I am very much indebted to Dr. Ambedkar for having very kindly 
explained this point of law. I quite see that custom has been defined in 
many judicial pronouncements. But that was not my point. I wanted to 
suggest that one of the accepted canons for the validity of custom should 
be that it should be judicially recognised. I suggest this fact that customs 
have been judicially recognised may not be given a goby when custom 
is opposed to public policy. If a custom has been judicially recognised, it 
means that it has passed through the seam of courts and has received 
recognition at the hands of the judiciary. 

Dr. Ambedkar : If I may intervene for a moment, that question will 
again arise, or may arise, or may be raised, when we are dealing with 
each particular clause. My hon. Friend suggested “any custom which is 
judicially recognised” ! It is perfectly open to him to say so. But as you 
very rightly observed, if we are to confine our recognition to a judicially 
recognised custom, it will create many dafficulties, because there are 
good customs which satisfy all the ingredients of the definition, yet have 
not come to the court for judicial recognition. I am only anticipating the 
difficulties. 

Shri Santhanam : The word ‘judicially recognised’ may mean, 
recognition by a district court, or a High Court. We cannot say judicially 
recognised means recognised by the Supreme Court. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : It must be judicially recognised 
and further it must be certain. It must be not unreasonable, it must be 
continuous and it must have the force of law. I only want custom which 
has been judicially recognised should not be given a go-by in the name 
of public policy. Therefore all these ingredients of a valid custom which 
are defined by the judicial courts may be accepted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The proviso requires that “the rule is certain”. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : It must be certain, not unreasonable 
and have the force of law, But the words “and uniformity” and “or 
opposed to public policy” may not be there. This is the difference I want 
to see carried out. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1208 


1208 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Where a single custom applies to all classes 
of human beings, then it is only by nature 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I beg to be excused. When it is said 
that a custom should apply to all human beings it must be almost a 
universal rule or law. It applies to a tribe, community, group or family, 
as has been defined here. If you say “uniformity” this would mean that 
the custom that applies to any family or caste or community or tribe will 
all go away. When the word “continuously” is there and when the word 
“law” is there I do not understand the necessity for the word “uniformity”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I understand “uniformity” to mean without 
variation. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is the point. I was almost going to say that. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : There are different customs between 
different families. How can they be uniform ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member has not appreciated the 
point. We shall assume that there is a custom and it has been continuous, 
but it has been followed with variations. Suppose somebody is collecting 
Rs. 10 in a certain period and it was Rs. 15 in the next period and Rs. 
20 in a third period, is it suggested that the application should be not 
only with respect to custom but to laws and grants also ? Suppose it 
is held by judicial decisions that this was not uniform. Therefore, you 
cannot presume. Similarly, uniformity means not uniformity with respect 
to the caste or family etc. but in the family itself it must have been not 
only continuous but uniform also, that is without variation. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is what it means — without variation. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : As if the changed custom will not 
be recognized by law, If there is a custom which has gone out of use 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Wherever there is a change, that change must 
have been so continuous, so long and so certain ,.. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : The word “continuous” is there and 
I do not object to it. I object to the word “uniformity”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Has Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad got any substantial 
amendment ? I do not think so. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I want to speak on ‘custom’. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : First I will deal with those who have got 
amendments. Does Mr. Jhunjhunwala want to speak on his amendment ? 
I am not inviting him to do so ! 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1209 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1209 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : Yes, Sir, I want to speak on it. 

In my amendment I want to add the word “varna” after “tribe”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : He wants caste custom also to be recognised 
there. He wants to introduce among the various categories “caste” also, 
after the word “tribe”. He has already tabled an amendment to that 
effect. Now he wants to change the nomenclature of the word from 
“caste” to “varna”. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : I want that the word “varna” should occur 
after the word “tribe” in clause 3(i). The object of my putting in this 
amendment is that while customs and usages will be recognised 
according to the area, tribe, community, group or family, the reasons 
for recognising such usages and customs have not been explained by the 
Honourable Doctor. But if the principle is accepted that certain customs 
and usages will be recognised, if as he has said these are proved to be 
progressive, in that case the customs which are prevalent in different 
varnas according to Varnashrama Dharma should be recognised if the 
conditions laid down by the Hon. Doctor are satisfied. 

This Varnashrama Dharma is of no recent origin. People say that it is 
only in the puranic time that these varnas, castes and all these things 
have come into existence. But that is not a fact. These things were 
in existence long before, say 3,000 years back. They have got a great 
deal to do with our life and social structure as well as our economic 
structure. All the four varnas have got different usages and different 
customs, and they have meaning behind them. Every usage and custom 
has got meaning behind it, and duties are allotted to different varnas 
according to their ability. The other day when a question was put to 
him whether he has got the sacred thread, the Hon. Mr. Gadgil said, 
‘Yes, I had a sacred thread”, then he took off his coat and said, “See, 
I have taken it away”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : He did not take off his coat. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : I stand corrected. He did not take off his 
whole coat and the reason which he gave, to which I attach importance, 
was that he is not capable of following the Dharma of a Brahmin for 
which the sacred thread is worn, and he said, “Therefore, as an honest 
man I thought it my duty to throw it away”. Sir, this shows that even 
the hon. Mr. Gadgil recognizes that there is something very great and 
sanctifying in the usage and of putting on the sacred thread before a 
Brahmin is married. In the same way there are similar customs in 
other varnas also. Therefore, it is very necessary that all the customs 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1210 


1210 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

which are prevalent in different varnas should be recognised if they 
satisfy the conditions laid down by the Hon. the Law Minister. I 
have therefore put in this amendment only with this object that if 
any such clauses come subsequently regarding marriage, divorce or 
any other thing, we may be in a position to show that these customs, 
though they may not be prevalent in any tribe or community or 
group of family, are prevalent in differently varnas and these are 
very essential. These are the reasons for which I want to add the 
word “varnas” there. 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha (Bihar) : May I know one thing from the 
hon. Member ? Is it his contention that while abrogating the smritis 
and shrutis we should not abrogate custom and usage ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Shrutis and smritis have not been 
abrogated; they have been incorporated. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : He will find that the Law Minister recognizes 
them. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : My amendment, as you will see 
suggests the omission of the two provisions in the sub-clause or 
item dealing with the expression ‘custom and usage’. The purpose 
of suggesting this amendment is exactly what has been mentioned 
by the Hon. Law Minister. The Hon. Law minister has said that the 
definition given here is more or less based on judicial findings on the 
point and judicial decisions have all been that the words ‘customs 
and usage’ should signify what he has laid down in the definition. 
The words ‘custom and usage’ must have been and have been the 
subject of various judicial findings and I therefore thought that if 
that is the legal or judicial meaning which has been given to the 
words ‘custom and usage’, it would not be desirable to encumber 
or burden this definition by making the provisions here, because 
that is exactly what they will mean. The reason for my making the 
submission is 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I can understand. When there is no 
definition at all he can rely upon judicial decisions. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The court will also be open 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Custom is continuous and uniform. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : When a certain word is used in a 
legislation which has been the subject of judicial interpretation, then 
that word whenever submitted to judicial interpretation will be liable 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1211 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1211 

to the interpretation that judicial decisions have given on it. On the 
other hand my feeling is that this law makes such revolutionary changes 
that the normal course of the manner in which the Hindu law has been 
interpreted will also undergo unthought of changes and my submission 
is that with the existence of the provisos, the judiciary may feel that 
the interpretations and rulings have to be considered afresh and the 
words ‘custom and usage’ may now have to be dealt with not only, for 
instance, on the ground that it has been continuous, that the rule is 
certain and not unreasonable or been opposed to public policy. You will 
see the difficulty, Sir, in this as you know that ‘public policy’ is a matter 
which is an ever-changing process. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Nobody denies that. What is the public policy 
under particular circumstances is the matter that will be decided. . . . 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Not only under particular circumstances 
but in the changing conditions of Government. One Government may 
have one public policy and another Government tomorrow may have 
another public policy. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The word ‘public policy’ also occurs in the Law of 
Contracts. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Under the Transfer of Property Act, no transfer 
is valid which is opposed to ‘public policy’. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : I also support the amendment of Pandit 
Thakur Das Bhargava with regard to the word ‘uniform’. The words 
‘custom and usage’ in my opinion are liable to lead to difficulties and 
also further litigation. It is not necessary that a certain rule or usage 
or custom should have been uniformly followed in a particular family 
and I shall refer to a Privy Council Case, if the Hon. Law Minister will 
have no objection. I refer to a very important case which was taken to 
the Privy Council by the successors of the Moghul Emperors. Now the 
case was as to who was to be the recipient of the pension paid by the 
Government of India to the successors of the Moghul Emperors and 
several people were disputing rights. One said, “I am the successor of 
the Moghul Emperor” and another said, “I am the successor”. The matter 
went up to the Privy Council and the point arose as to which of them 
was circumcized, because one of them was not 

Dr. Ambedkar : I know that case. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : And the Privy Council held in 
this particular case that although normally the rule and custom of 
circumcision obtained in the Muslim families, in the case of the Moghul 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1212 


1212 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Emperors, when there was a child from the Hindu wife, circumcision 
was not necessary and they were entitled to the pension or something 
like that. Therefore the Hon. Law Minister will appreciate that this 
uniformity with regard to customs even in a particular family has 
not been a necessary factor and I think that he will do well to adopt 
this amendment of Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava, suggesting that the 
word ‘uniformity’ be dropped. 

Dr. Ambedkar : This has no judicial value. The distinction there 
was made between custom and practice. Practice has no judicial value. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I want to speak with regard to the 
definition of the word ‘custom’ to begin with and I must say that I 
am in entire agreement with the official draftsman. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : For once. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I am in general agreement with the 
Hon. Minister except on occasions when he cannot be made reasonable. 
With regard to this definition of the word ‘custom’ it is not merely 
the Indian law but it is also the law throughout the world. I have a 
copy of Holland’s Jurisprudence which also lays down that a custom 
in order to be followed must be reasonable, must be continuous, 
must not be broken and it must be of ancient standing. This is all 
that is laid down there. The question of uniformity is regarded in 
Jurisprudence as absolutely essential. If once a custom is broken, it 
ceases to bear the character of custom at all. This has always been 
regarded so. So the mere fact that a custom is broken is enough to 
break the custom. Therefore, I think the definition as it stands should 
be supported. So far as judicial decision is concerned, the judicial 
decisions in all cases must have been or are supposed to have been 
given in view of these considerations but these are considerations 
which are essential, which are to be found in books of Jurisprudence 
and therefore, it is far better to rely upon these essential elements 
rather than rely upon judicial definitions because judicial definitions 
might be coloured with regard to the difficulties of a particular case 
and it is far better to rely upon well-known expressions rather than 
rely upon judicial decisions. Therefore, I think that the definition in 
the Bill should remain. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : I have not been able to appreciate the necessity 
of the two amendments that have been moved by my hon. Friend, 
Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava, particularly in view of his own view. 
His view I understand, is that the definition of ‘custom’ should be 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1213 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1213 

a restricted one and that various sorts of customs in various parts of the 
country in different forms, in different methods should not be allowed 
to prevail. That being his view, with which I am in entire agreement, I 
think that if the amendments suggested by Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava 
are accepted, the scope, the denotation of the word ‘custom’ would be 
considerably extended and expanded which should not be. The one 
useful thing about this Bill is that it is going to unify and consolidate 
the Hindu society in some measure and therefore the less the variations 
in manners and customs and in the rules applicable to Hindu society, 
the better it is. The essential basis of this Code is uniformity which it 
will bring about and we should not get away from that mooring and 
in the consideration of every clause in this Bill, we should never lose 
sight of this thing. Once we lose sight of this thing. Once we lose sight 
11 00 A M that we shall be virtually giving away the basis of this 

new enactment. What does Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava 
suggest? Firstly, he suggests that the word ‘uniformly’ should be done 
away with. That would mean that a custom even if it has not been 
uniformly observed should be a custom under this definition, Obviously, 
that extends the scope of the definition of custom. Secondly, he suggests 
that the words ‘opposed to public policy’ should be deleted. That, again, 
means that a custom even though it may be opposed to public policy, 
according to the prevalent notions of public policy at any particular 
time, should have the sanctity of a custom as defined here. That, 
again, would be extending the scope of custom and not restricting it. I 
submit these suggestions should not be accepted. To me, it appears that 
the words ‘opposed to public policy’ are very necessary and essential. 
Because, our society, or any society is an ever-growing society and 
notions about morality, propriety and advisability of a thing change 
from time to time. We should not put a stop to that desirable change. 
A custom which has even been judicially recognised at any particular 
time, may, 10 or 20 years thereafter appear to the society to be not a 
proper or desirable custom. At that time, it should be open to society 
and even to the law courts to declare that this custom, though it has 
had recognition in judicial pronouncements, according to the changed 
conditions of society and the changed economic and social theories 
which have been adopted by society, should not be recognised as a 
valid custom. I therefore submit that this part, as it stands, should 
be accepted. 

I submit the amendment suggested by my hon. Friend 
Mr. Jhunjhunwala may be accepted because that appears to be a harmless 
thing. I beg to suggest, Sir, at this stage, if it may not be considered 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1214 


1214 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a late stage, to the Hon. Law Minister that the words ‘or family’ in 
the, substantive clause may be deleted. Because, to me, it appears 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Where is the amendment ? 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : that a custom which has been in force 

only in a particular family should not be given the sanctity of a valid 
and recognised custom. 

Dr. Deshmukh : It has already been given by the Hindu Law. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : We have in the sub-clause the words : 

“signifies a rule which, having been continuously and uniformly 

observed for a long time, has obtained the force of law among Hindus 

in any local area, tribe, community, group or family.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The House is aware of that expression. The 
hon. Member has tabled a number of amendments, he never thought 
at any particular stage that these words should be dropped. I do not 
want ot allow any time to be spent on this matter. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : I am not moving any amendment. I am opposing 
this particular part of the clause. I do not think I will have any further 
opportunity to suggest this. As for my not moving an amendment. I 
may be permitted to confess that having been very much disappointed 
in finding that none of my amendments are acceptable to the Hon. Law 
Minister, I thought, rather than moving an amendment formally, I 
may informally suggest the thing to him so that he may himself move 
an amendment to that effect. In that case, it would be more easily 
acceptable to the House. Anyway, I have nothing further to submit 
on this point. 

Shri Shiv Charan Lai (Uttar Pradesh) : I think all the amendments 
should be negatived and the clause as it is should be accepted. Pandit 
Thakur Das Bhargava, being a lawyer — I am surprised to see — says 
that the words ‘opposed to public policy’ should be deleted. That is 
a very necessary thing . As society advances, the opinion of society 
carries more weight. Anything that is against that opinion should not 
be acceptable even though it may be an old custom. Pandit Thakur 
Das Bhargava also wants that the word ‘uniformly’ should be deleted. 
By the word ‘uniformly’ he seems to understand uniformly for all 
the people. It is not so. It may be the custom of one family. By 
‘uniformly’, it is meant that it is followed continuously or uniformly 
and not changed. Therefore, the word ‘uniformly’ is also necessary. 

He says that only those customs for which there are judicial 
pronouncements should be accepted. This is also wrong. There are 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1215 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1215 

certain judicial pronouncements which are now not good law because 
public opinion has changed. The people do not want that custom to 
continue. There are certain customs which are very well-recognised, 
but which have never gone to the courts and on which there are no 
judicial pronouncements. Therefore, I submit, all the amendments 
of Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava do not stand anywhere. 

In the amendment of Mr. Jhunjhunwala, he wants to add the word 
varna. There are no customs connected with any varna. All customs 
are connected with caste, families, certain areas. I do not know of 
any custom or any decision of any court where a custom has been 
recognised as a custom of a varna. That has never come before any 
court. As to the amendment of Mr. Syamnandan Sahaya, he wants 
to delete the two provisos. These provisos are the life and soul of 
the whole definition. Therefore, they cannot be deleted. Therefore, 
Sir, I am in support of clause (i) as it is. 

Shri B. K. P. Sinha : I think there is no force in the amendments 
moved to this clause. This clause, as put in by the Hon. Law 
Minister is simple and embodies the law as it is. The critics have 
objected to the words “uniformity” and “public policy”. But, it has 
been laid down by so many decisions and judgements of the various 
High Courts that a custom to be valid must be uniformly practised. 
Mr. Syamnandan Sahaya referred to some Privy Council Case in 
support. This contention that uniformity was not an essential of 
valid custom. I could not catch him; therefore, I speak subject to 
correction. There is a distinction between social and religious customs 
and customs that prevail in the agriculture and trade field. So far 
as society and religion are concerned, custom and usage are rather 
inter-changeable terms and there is very little distinction between 
the two. But, in the case of trade and agriculture, a distinction 
has been made between custom and usage. Custom is noted for 
its antiquity; it must come down from time immemorial. Usage is 
something which is in the process of growth ; it is something new. 
The Privy Council case of which I know, makes a distinction only 
so far as trade and agriculture are concerned. But, that is not 
germane or very relevant to this question, which is a social and 
semi-religious question. I have found in so many decisions uniformity 
is prescribed as a test of the validity of a custom. As regards public 
policy, I do not know why people have fears on this ground because 
I find that it has been laid down by the Privy Council, by the 
Patna, Calcutta and several other High Courts that a custom which 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1216 


1216 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is opposed to public policy shall not be valid. In this respect also, I find 
that the Hon. Law Minister has, in his clause, embodied the law as it 

is. Moreover, it we go on making an exception in favour of all sorts of 
customs, what would be the basis and justification for this codification. 
Codification is mainly done to introduce uniformity and certainty. If we 
make exceptions in favour of customs prevailing in families, in different 
territories, etc., there would be no uniform law for the whole country, 
and the whole object of codification would be defeated. The second object 
of codification is that there will be something handy to which everybody 
can refer, with certainty. If we make exceptions in favour of customs, 
etc., this certainity would have gone. Therefore from any point of view, 
I see no reason why this clause should not be passed as it is, and why 
any amendment should be accepted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I will now call upon the Hon. Law Minister. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh (Bihar) : Sir, I have also to say something. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : But has not enough been said already ? 

*Shri Bhatt : (English translation of the Hindi Speech). I have got 
an amendment. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Which is your amendment ? I have disallowed 

it. 

Shri Bhatt : You have allowed it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : But there is no particular charm about it. It 
is only a matter of recasting the word slightly. 

Shri Bhatt : That I am to explain as to why I was putting it. I am 
not moving it simply for recasting of the words. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : I kept standing for long. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : What should I do ? 

Shri V. J. Gupta (Madras) : Sir, I do not want to make a speech, 
but I want to get a doubt cleared. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : Your eye should have caught me. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It does not mean that just because an hon. 
Member stands a number of times he catches my eye. I must have 
some discretion in regulating the debate, and I might call upon certain 
Members and not certain others. But if there is yet time, we shah see. 
* P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 21st September 1951, pp. 3014-54. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1217 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1217 

Dr. Ambedkar : There is only one point to be explained and 

Shri Bhatt : You have given me time. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : All right. I will call the Law Minister later. 
But after all it is a very formal and verbal matter that is dealt with 
in this amendment. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : No, Sir, it is important too. 

Shri Bhatt : The amendment moved by me is not verbal. The thing 
which I want to stress in it may possibly not be acceptable to the 
Hon. Minister and he may not be inclined to change his attitude. As 
a matter of fact, as a Lawyer I am not so competent as to convince 
him. But I want to tell him and draw his attention to certain things 
lacking in the measure that is being sponsored by him. 

The first point is about the definition of ‘custom and usage’ which 
he has put here in an insufficient form. On reconsideration he will 
himself feel inclined to reduce or add a few words to convey the 
complete sense. 

By ‘custom and usage’ we mean traditions, conventions and routine 
practices, The definition being propounded by him for it limits the 
sense to four essential attributes, viz., continuity, uniformity, certainity 
and its not being opposed to public policy. In its place I am thinking 
of a simplier definition which may precisely convey the same sense. 
But he has talked of uniformity. What does this uniformity mean? 
Different castes have their different customs. Even a single caste, 
spread roughly over a thousand villages, allows various concessions 
and different usages to the separate circles, and therefore even in a 
single caste there is a separate sort of uniformity for separate places. 
There are variations. Therefore the word uniformity would give rise to 
a lot of litigation and benefit the lawyers It may therefore be dropped 
as variation is inevitable. 

If a community made certain variations, it being its usage, it was 
likely to pay a fine of Rs. 50. But now-a-days Rs. 50 mean nothing and 
cannot have affect to the desired extent and therefore if one suggests 
to increase the fine to Rs. 100 you would say that uniformity is not 
there. Today you change a thing which was good till yesterday, then 
where is uniformity ? Therefore, as regards uniformity we should agree 
that variations are bound to be. 

I shall quote here from Article 13 of the Constitution to explain 
how the word ‘law’ has been defined there : 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1218 


1218 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“law includes any ordinance, order, bye-law, rule, regulation, 
notification, custom or usage having in the territory of India the force 
of law.” 

Here ‘territory of India’ does not mean that there is going to be 
only one custom throughout India. There is not going to be any one 
order or notification applicable throughout India. The Government 
of India decides its policy for each State according to circumstances 
prevailing there. 

I also want to tell you what is meant by ‘law in force’, and this 
will explain what I understand from the words ‘variations’ and 
‘uniformity’ : 

“laws in force’ include laws passed or made by a Legislature or other 
competent authority in the territory of India before the commencement 
of this Constitution and not previously repealed, notwithstanding that 
any such law or any part thereof may not be then in operation either 
at all or in particular areas.” 

So, I want to suggest that the word ‘uniformity’ used here will 
make complications and nothing will be lost if it is dropped. After 
all what does this ‘custom’ mean ? We are educated enough to 
understand that ‘custom’ is an usage prevalent from the time of our 
forefathers. You might quote certain thing prevalent upto yesterday, 
in which you have made a change today, but, for that reason, shall 
we not take it as custom and will it not affect us ? It may not affect 
economists, but it is not proper. Therefore, if you want to bring the 
word ‘custom’ and allow some concession according to it, it may be 
put in a way that people may get something through it. 

‘Custom’ has been defined in the Law Dictionary as follows : 

“It must have been continued, peaceable, reasonably certain man 
runs not to the contrary. 

“It must have been continued, peaceable, reasonably certain, 
compulsory and not left to the option of every person whether he will 
use it or not, and consistent with other customs, for one custom cannot 
be said to be in opposition to another.” 

These things should be taken into consideration. I have suggested 
that the word “continuous” was equivalent to ‘having been in vogue’ 
This is not a wrong word, ‘in vogue’ being a comprehensive word 
of the English language meaning a thing prevalent and in practice. 
That is why I have proposed ; ‘having been in vogue for a long time’, 
‘it has been in practice for a long time’. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1219 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1219 

The second thing which I have put is : ‘which has obtained the 
force of law’. This is a simple thing and if accepted will become a 
recognised convention. 

The third point I have taken is about ‘public policy’ or ‘public 
morality’. I fail to understand that if conventions find place in the 
proposed measure, where was the necessity for the word ‘public policy’ ? 
You might say that only accepted customs will be allowed at a place 
and not others, then which customs will be against public policy ? 
What does ‘public policy’ mean ? The word might have dropped from 
some lawyer or judge and we are now using it, but we should be clear 
about the meaning of ‘public policy’. I think there is no necessity for 
any such expression as ‘public policy’ or ‘public morality’. After all 
where there will be a place in law for conventions, only there the 
conventions will be followed. So I do not find any necessity for these 
words. 

Now I want to say something about caste and sub-caste. The words 
are not my own ; they have been used in Articles 15 and 16 of our 
Constitution. We used the word ‘community’ in Clause 2 yesterday. 
We have not used the word ‘community’ but the word ‘caste’ in the 
Constitution. In my opinion the words ‘castes and sub-castes’ will be 
more proper here in place of the word ‘community’. I do not mean that 
the word ‘community’ may be dropped as we have included it only 
yesterday, but there is no harm if these two words are also added. 

With these words I move my amendment. There is very little 
likelihood of its being carried, but the Hon. Minister will please think 
over it. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : (English translation of the Hindi 
speech). Sir, I submit that the decision arrived at by you is very nice 
and acceptable to all. But sometimes you make decisions in such a 
haste that it pinches us. Therefore, I entreat you not to decide in 
haste on the ground that there has been sufficient debate upon the 
measure. I submit that I also stood up so many times, your eye should 
have caught me and I should also have been allowed to speak. 

Shri V. J. Gupta : I have a doubt to be clarified. In the definition 
it is said : 

“The expressions ‘custom’ and ‘usage’ signify a rule which, having 
been continuously and uniformly observed for a long time, has obtained 
the force of law among Hindus in any local area, tribe, community, 
group or family.” 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1220 


1220 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

As you know in our parts marriage between a young man and his 
maternal uncle’s daughter is allowed in many communities. It is a 
common custom though it is not uniformly or continuously observed. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : You must read the entire chapter. There is 
a special exception made. 

Shri V. J. Gupta : Further, it is said “opposed to public policy”. A 
practice is called a custom when observed by all the people of a locality. 
When it is observed by all people uniformly how can it be opposed to 
public policy ? 

Dr. Deshmukh : I want to oppose this. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : You can vote against it. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : We would like to speak also on it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I know Hon. Members have a right to speak 
but I have looked round and I am satisfied that there has been a 
sufficient debate. If the Hon. Member wants that the formality of a 
question being put should be observed, let someone move it and I shall 
put it to the House. 

Shri Santhanam : Sir, the question be now put. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

“That the question be now put.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : My voice was louder than their voice ! 

Dr. Ambedkar : In my previous intervention I had explained already 
both the position of this sub-clause in relation to clause 4 and how the 
question of custom has been dealt with generally vis-a-vis the Code. 

With regard to the exact terms which have been used to define the 
expression ‘custom’ I am sorry to say that it is not possible for me to 
accept any of the amendments suggested. This definition, as I have 
said, has been copied verbatim from judicial decisions of the highest 
tribunal in our country as well as in all other countries, where custom 
has been judicially defined. I do not think therefore that any ground 
has been made out for me to depart from the definition proposed in 
the sub-clause. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

In clause 3, for the words “unless there is anything repugnant in the 
subject or context“ substitute ’’unless the context otherwise requires”. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1221 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1221 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

In clause 3, renumber the existing items (i), (ii), (iii) and (iv) as items 
(ii), (iii), (iv) and (v) and insert the following as item (i), namely : 

“(i) ‘Aliyasantana law’ means the system of law applicable to persons 
who, if this Code had not been psssed, would have been governed by the 
Madras Aliyasantana Act, 1949 (Madras Act IX of 1949).” 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : With the re-numbering of the parts as adopted 
by the previous amendment all the amendments relating to part (i) now 
relate to the present (ii). I shall put them to the House one by one. 

The question is : 

In part (i) renumbered as part (ii) of clause 3, for the words “among 
Hindus” substitute the words “among persons to whom this Code applies”. 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

In part (i) renumbered as part (ii) omit the words “and uniformity”. 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

In part (i) renumbered as part (ii) of clause 3 — (a) after the words 
“group or family” occurring in line 4, add the following : 

“or any rule which is certain not unreasonable and has been judicially 
recognised as valid and binding in any local area, tribe, community, 
group or family”; and 

(b) Omit the first proviso. 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

In part (i) renumbered as part (ii) after the word “tribe” insert the 
word “Varna”. 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : in view of this amendment No. 413 having 
been negatived amendment No. 414 does not arise. 

The question is : 

Omit the provisions to part (i) re-numbered as part (ii) of clause 3. 


The motion was negatived. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1222 


1222 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

For part (i) renumbered as part (ii) of clause, substitute the following : 

“(ii) the expressions ‘custom’ and ‘usage’ signify any rule which 
having been in vogue for a long time, has obtained the force of law 
among Hindus in any local area, caste, sub-caste, tribe, community, 
group or family : 

Provided that the rule is certain and not unreasonable ; and 

Provided further that in the case of a rule applicable only to a 
family it has not been discontinued by the family.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

“That part (i) renumbered as part (ii) of clause 3, stand part of 
the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I have amendment No 377 to part (ii). 

Dr. Ambedkar : I would very much like to make suggestion here 
because that will shorten the labour. As you will see, some of the 
definitions given in part (ii) not only apply to marriage and divorce 
but they also were intended to apply to the other parts of the Code. 
In view of what has transpired, it would be necessary for me at a 
subsequent stage to amend this definition and to narrow it down to 
the provisions relating to marriage and divorce. Therefore, what I 
was going to suggest to the House is to pass this in a formal manner 
without attaching any great importance to it, because I shall come 
back to it when I deal with consequential amendments and then the 
matter may be dealt with at great length if they want. For the moment 
I am not very particular about this definition because I see that I will 
have to amend it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is there any objection to allowing this to 
stand over this part alone ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have no objection. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : In view of what has transpired, some 
consequential amendments have to be made later. So, I will allow this 
part to stand over. 

Shri Santhanam : It will mean the whole clause standing over. 
But after passing parts (viii) and (ix) the whole clause has to be put. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1223 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1223 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is in the discretion of the Chair to put the 
whole clause or put it part by part. As a matter of fact, I have placed 
it part by part and we have already adopted two parts. 

Shri Bharati : Definitions may be added at any time. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : If the Bill is going to be restricted in scope 
then what is the harm in doing so ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : My amendment is for this very purpose, Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Hon. Member has thought much in 
advance and the Hon. Minister is only accepting what he is saying. So, 
this matter will stand over. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I have no objection. 

Shri Bharati : The words “full blood” and “half blood” do not occur 
in the part of the Code which we intend to pass. Originally we had 
intended to pass the whole Code and these words were necesary. Now 
that these words do not occur in this part we may as well drop them. 

Dr. Ambedkar : They may arise in connection with prohibited degrees, 
sapindaship and so on. Therefore, my suggestion is that it might be 
desirable at this stage to pass the part and if at a later stage I find it 
is necessary to make some amendments I will do so. 

Shri Bharati : After all, these are definitions of words which must 
have a reference to the words occurring in the subsequent chapters. If 
we do not see these words at all in the chapters on marriage and divorce 
I do not see any virtue in having the definition. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : This part is amended by amendment No. 
360 which is the latest version of this part. But even there terms like 
“uterine blood” appear. 

Dr. Ambedkar : My suggestion is that the better thing would be 
to allow these definitions going through ; if subsequently we find it 
necessary to change we shall change it, because, as I have already stated, 
I reserve the right of bringing appropriate amendments in view of what 
has happened with regard to this Code. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : In any way, without any doubt this is required 
for the chapters on marriage and divorce. And these terms are there 
both in the original part and in the amended one. 

Now I will put part (iii) to vote. 

The question is : 

“That part (iii) renumbered as part (iv) of clause 3 stand part of the 

Bill.” 


The motion was adopted. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1224 


1224 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

In the explanation to item (iv) re-numbered as ( v ), for “this clause” 
substitute “clauses (iv) and (v)”. 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

“That part (iv) renumbered as part (v), as amended, stand part of 
the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

In clause 3 after part (iv) renumbered as part (v), add the following 
new part : 

“(vi) ‘Marumakkattayam law’ means the system of law applicable to 
persons — 

(a) who, if this code had not been passed, would have been governed 
by the Madras Marumakkattayam Act, 1932 (Madras Act XXII of 1933), 
the Travancore Nair Act, II of 1100, the Travancore Ezhava Act, III 
of 1100, the Nanjindad Vellala Act, 1101, the Travancore Kshatriya 
Act, 1108, the Travancore Krishnavaka-Marumakkathayee Act, 1115, 
the Cochin Thiyya Act, VIII of 1107, the Cochin Nayar Act of 1113, 
or the Cochin Marumakkathayam Act, XXXIII of 1113; or 

(b) who belong to any community, the members of which are 
largely domiciled in the State of Travancore-Cochin or Madras, and 
who, if this Code had not been passed, would have been ogverned 
by any system of inheritance in which descent is traced through the 
female line; but does not include the Aliyasantana law ;” 

The motion was adopted. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : This is subject to reconsideration. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : No. We have passed the Aliyasantana law. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The substance may be reconsidered. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : So far as the language is concerned, the Hon. 
Member is always at liberty to suggest any modifications. 

The question is : 

In cluase 3, after the definition of “Marumakkattayam law” add the 
following new part : 

“(vii) ‘Nambudri law’ means the law applicable to persons who, 
if this code had not been governed by the Madras Nambudri 
Act, 1932 (Madras Act XXI of 1933), the Cochin Nambudri Act 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1225 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1225 

(XVII of 1114), or the Travancore Malayala Brahmin Act of 1106 (Regulation 

III of 1106);” 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Now, we come to part (viii) — that is the original 
part (v). It says ‘ “Part” means any Part of this Code’ — Does he want it 
to go in ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : For the moment, it is very difficult for me to say 
what I want to amend or excise. I want time to consider. Later on I may 
change it to ‘Bill’ or ‘Chapter’ 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Then I will leave the origin (v) [ the present 
(viii) ] to stand over. 

Now, I come to definition of “prescribed”. 

Capt. A. P. Singh (Vindya Pradesh) : I want to add the definition of 
“Kul” in the definition clause. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Let us finish these first. The question is : 

“That part (vi) renumbered as part (ix) of clause 3 stand part of the Bill.” 

The motion was adpoted. 

Shri Bharati : Is it understood that the word ‘Code’ may be changed ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : It will be appropriately changed. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Part (vi) relating to definition of ‘prescribed’ as 
renumbered is accepted. Now, we come to part (vii) relating to definition 
of ‘related’. It is renumbered as (x). The question is : 

“That part (vii), renumbered as part (x) of clause 3 stand part of the 

Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Now we come to part (vi) of amendment No. 5 by 
Dr. Ambedkar. It says — in item (viii) as renumbered, for ‘any’ substitute ‘a’. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Originally it was ‘any part’. I now say ‘a part’. But 
you will remember that you have held over renumbered Part (viii). So, 
this will also stand over. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Then we come to the definiton of ‘son’ — part 
(viii) of the original clause. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I have got an amendment here. It 
is No. 127. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It is a kind of power of attorney. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1226 


1226 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Rajagopalachari : It is a kind of adoption in Punjab. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : It is not power of attorney. It is made-easy. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I beg to move : 

For part (viii) renumbered as part (xi) of clause 3, substitute the 
following : 

“(xi) ‘son’ includes an appointed heir and an adopted son whether 

appointed or adopted before or after the commencement of this Code 

but does not include an illegitimate son.” 

As the House probably knows, the appointment of an heir is a special 
custom in Punjab. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : We were considering the definition of ‘son’. 
So far as an heir or a person who is appointed as an heir is concerned, 
it may be that he may be appointed as an heir for the purpose of the 
property. In fact, it may be a person who may be fit enough to marry 
the daughter of the person appointing him as the heir. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : By custom, he is equivalent to 
a son. Therefore, he cannot marry his own sister. The person who is 
appointed as heir carries an intimate relationship. He is just like a son 
for all practical purposes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Even to the extent of coming into the prohibited 
degree ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Yes. He comes into that family. 
There are several customs with regard to appointed heirs in the territory 
which is now under the Commissionership of Ambala. It is just like 
adoption. There is absolutely no difference between adoption and the 
appointment of an heir. The ceremonies even are sometimes the same. 
The person who is appointed as heir is treated more or less as the son. 
He cannot marry the daughter of the appointer, because the daughter 
of the appointer is his sister. No person in Punjab will ever believe that 
the daughter of the appointing father can possibly be married to that 
boy. He could not marry even a cousin. He is treated just like a son. The 
only difference is that, so far as the eligibility of an heir is concerned, 
he may be a married man with sons and daughters. 

Dr. Ambedkar : He can also be a man with dhadi. 

Shri Rajagopalachari : The hon. Member will perhaps educate us 
in the matter — is it open, according to that custom to appoint ones own 
son-in-law as his son ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : In that case he is called ‘ghar-javai’. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1227 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1227 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Corresponding to this there is a custom in 
the south — it is called ‘illatom adoption’. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : This custom is not only judicially 
recognised ; it is so widely prevalent that it is as good as law. It is a fully 
establishied custom, it has got more force, perhaps, than the ordinary 
law of the land. It is universally acknowledged among the Hindus, Sikhs 
as well as the Muslims. The relationship created thereby is not merely 
of gift, or mere apointment of an heir. The relationship is personal; the 
appointed heir is treated as a son and he lives with the father. 

Dr. Ambedkar : For property purposes. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : For property purposes as well as 
for relationship. He cannot marry the daughter, as an outsider does. 
Therefore it is not a question of merely property ; it is a question of 
personal relationship. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Can the son be older than the father ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : He can be older, just as a nephew 
can be older than the person adopting. Supposing a brother adopts the 
son of a brother. The son of a brother may be older to him in age than 
the person appointing. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is there any ceremony attached to it ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : It is done in several ways. It must 
be made public ; so there is a registered deal in some cases. The entire 
family is collected and the boy is accepted as heir. In some places even 
the ceremony is gone through. Practically it is tantamount to adoption. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : In those parts where this custom is prevalent, 
is there regular adoption as well ? Or is it the contention that wherever 
this custom of having ‘appointed heir’ prevails, regular adoption does 
not take place ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : This is, as a matter of fact, in 
addition to that. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Can a man have both, an adopted son as well 
as an appointed heir. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Even in a family, one brother may 
have an adopted son, while another brother may have an appointed 
heir. But there is no difference so far as relationsip is concerned. This 
custom obtains among Muslims as well. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1228 


1228 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Khwaja Inait Ullah (Bihar) : In Muslim law there is no adoption. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am not dealing with Muslim 
law ; I am speaking of Muslim customs. Almost every Punjabi Muslim 
follows custom. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : But it is so prevalent that it can be brought 
under this definition. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Nobody can doubt the validity of 
this custom. You can take any treatise on customary law and you will 
find that the appointment of a heir is a customary practice. 

Shri Radhelal Vyas : Is a female appointed as an heir ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : But she cannot become a son. 

Dr. Ambedkar : In view of the fact that it has been decided to confine 
this Bill to marriage and divorce, the point raised by my Hon. Friend 
may very well come when we are dealing with the matter of adoption. 
There we can discuss this question as to whether we can include what 
he calls an appointed son in the definition of adopted son. There, if 
he is able to satisfy that custom is a custom which this House should 
permit, in view of the definition which we have just now passed, we 
will consider that question. Here we are for the moment dealing with 
marriage and divorce. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : But you have used the word “son” 
here ; otherwise there will be no need for any definition. 

Dr. Ambedkar : As you know in the Chapter on Adoption, we have 
tried to introduce a uniform system, we are not recognising any of the 
variants of adoption. We say that adoption should be one common system 
throughout. We have also said there that so far as the ceremonies of 
adoption are concerned, they may be different. We do not bother about 
it. If the appointment of a son is satisfactory from the point of view 
of the deifnition of adoption, namely, the giving and the taking, the 
putting of the sugar in the mouth of the boy and the performance of 
some sacrifice, well the particular ceremonies by which they do it will 
not make the appointed son an adopted son. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Unfortunately, I have not been 
able to express myself in a way as to carry conviction to Dr. Ambedkar. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The point raised by Pandit Bhargava has 
relevance to marriage as well. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am afraid, without a perfect understanding of 
the custom, I am not able to come to any decision — the circumstances, 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 1229 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1229 

the custom, the reasonableness or otherwise. Nor has my friend been 
able to give us any clear picture. I want to apply my mind to that 
subject and come to a conclusion as to whether it would be possible for 
Government to accept his proposal. All of a sudden it is not possible. 

[12 Noon] 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Let it be held over. 

Dr. Ambedkar : We can add it afterwards. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : May I suggest one course ? As it is, there 
is no objection to passing this. The only attempt is to include some 
other category. Therefore this may be passed now, because we are not 
passing the entire clause 3. We can add one more category later. With 
that understanding I will put this part to the vote of the House, the 
question is : 

“That part (viii) renumbered as part (xi) of clause 3 stand part of 

the Bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Now we will proceed to clause 4. 

Capt. A. P. Singh : I have already requested you that one definition 
should be added after part (viii). The amendment is No. 378, and is 
about the definition of Kula . It may surprise some hon. Members as to 
why I want that this word should be defined. But if you see amendment 
No. 387, there I have said that “the parties do not belong to the same 
Kula where by custom such marriages are prohibited.” I want this 
word to be defined here so that marriages may not take place within 
the same Kula. 

Dr. Ambedkar : May I just explain the position. I am afraid that 
this amendment, although it is a definition, really relates to clause 7 — 
Essentials for a valid Dharmik marriage — where certain conditions for a 
valid Dharmic marriage have been set out. My friend wants substantively 
to add one more condition that the parties to a marriage should not 
belong to the same Kula. If that amendment is accepted, then and 
then alone would a definition of ‘Kula’ be necessary, although it may 
be argued that ‘Kula’ is such a well known term that no definition is 
necessary. But suppose when we are dealing with clause 7 this matter 
is taken up and the House accepts the amendment, then and there we 
can intorduce the definition of ‘Kula’. Therefore no definition of ‘Kula’ 


is necessary now. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1230 


1230 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Capt. A. P. Singh : My difficulty is this. Whenever any such thing 
comes it is generally said “The word has not been defined”. Therefore, 
I wanted that “Kula” should be defined now and let us be clear on this 
point. But if it can be done later I have no objection. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : If in clause 7 this is not going to be accepted, 
the definition here will become useless. But if on the other hand it is 
accepted and a definition is found necessary a consequential amendment 
will be made here. I am not closing the door. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Or it can be done by an Explanation as to what is 
meant by ‘Kula’. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Clause 3 is not completed, or, as the Hon. 
the Law Minister said, we can give it as an Explanation. 

Capt. A. P. Singh : Then it may be held over. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Now we shall take up clause 4. 

Clause 4 — (Overriding effect of Code ). 

Dr. Ambedkar : I beg to move : 

For clause 4, substitute : 

“4. Overriding effect of Code — Save as otherwise expressly provided 

in this Code : — 

(a) any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu law or any custom 
or usage in force immediately before the commencement of this Code 
shall cease to have effect with respect to any of the matters dealt 
with in this Code ; and 

(b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement 
of this Code shall cease to have effect, in so far as it is inconsistent 
with any of the provisions contained in this Code.” 

The purpose of the amendment is this. As the House will see, we had 
originally one single clause with no sub -clauses and the provisions of the 
Code relating to custom and interpretation of law and those relating to 
other laws passed and in force were put together. It was felt that it was 
not the desire of this Bill to abrogate all law but only in so far as it is 
inconsistent with the provisions of the Bill. I therefore, felt that the best 
course was to split clause 4 into (a) and (b) leaving rule, interpretation 
and custom to be covered by (a) and any law in force to be dealt with 
by (b) with the limitation that no law shall be abrogated unless it was 
inconsistent with this Code. It is not our intention that all laws should 
be abrogated by this. That is the purpose of this amendment. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1231 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1231 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment moved : 

For clause 4, substitute : 

“4. Overriding effect of Code. — Save as otherwise expressly provided 

in this Code : — 

(a) any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law or any custom 
or usage in force immediately before the commencement of this Code 
shall cease to have effect with respect to any of the matters dealt 
with in this Code ; and 

(b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement 
of this Code shall cease to have effect, in so far as it is inconsistent 
with any of the provisions contained in this Code.” 

Dr. Deshmukh : I beg to move : 

In the amendment proposed by Dr. Ambedkar, in part (a) of the 
proposed clause 4, omit the words “or any custom or usage”. 

Shall I speak on it now or afterwards ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I shall first have all the amendments that 
hon. Members intend moving and then allow the discussion. Amendment 
moved : 

In the amendment proposed by Dr. Ambedkar, in part (a) of the 
proposed clause 4, omit the words “or any custom or usage”. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not understand it. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is that if there is a custom it shall continue. 
I take it that the object of the amendment is that notwithstanding any of 
the provisions of this Code, any custom in force before the commencement 
of the Code will override what is now sought to be abrogated. Is that so ? 

Dr. Deshmukh : Yes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : We will assume two things. Wherever it is 
not provided for, the custom will prevail, there is no doubt about it. But 
wherever there is some provision here, the custom will be abrogated. 
Custom, where it is inconsistent, will be abrogated by the amendment. 
The hon. Member wants that custom, not only where it is provided for 
here but also where it is not provided for, must override the text of law. 
That is the position. I will ask to reply to this later on. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : I beg to move : 

In clause 4, omit the words “or any custom or usage” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is the same thing. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : My suggestion is that custom would continue 
in spite of this Act. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1232 


1232 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment moved : 

In clause 4, omit the words “or any custom or usage”. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I beg to move : 

For clause 4, substitute the following : 

“4. any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law or any customary 
usage in force immediately before the commencement of this Code 
shall have effect with respect to any of the matters not dealt with 
the Code.” 

This is the positive side of the matter. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Whatever is not provided in this Code shall 
have effect. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That would be so, when we close with clause 55. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : What I say is that these things 
will persist as a positive fact and there is not much difference between 
the two. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment moved : 

“4. Any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law or any customary 
usage in force immediately before the commencement of this Code 
shall have effect with respect to any of the matters not dealt with 
in this Code.” 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : There is another amendment in 
my name No. 449. I beg to move : 

For clause 4, substitute the following : 

“4. any custom or usage in force immediately before the 
commmencement of this Code shall be binding and shall override all 
texts, rule or interpretation of the Hindu Law or any provision of 
any other law and shall have precedence in all matters relating to 
marriage and divorce.” 

This is an antithesis of section 4 and this is only to bring out into 
ironical relief the place what my Hon. friend Dr. Ambedkar wants to 
give to ‘custom’ which I personally do not approve. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am trying to put down categories so that I 
may insert all the amendments under a particular group. Amendment 
No. 128 relates to custom wherever there is no provision of law in 
this Bill. Then amendment No. 449 says that notwithstanding any 
provisions in this Bill all the previous custom shall stand. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1233 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1233 

Shri Santhanam : It is a direct negation of clause 4. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment moved : For clause 4, substitute 
the following : 

“4. any custom or usage in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Code shall be binding and shall override all 
texts, rule or interpretation of the Hindu Law or any provision of 
any other law and shall have precedence in all matters relating to 
marriage and divorce.” 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : I beg to move : 

For clause 4, substitute the following : 

“4. All the texts, rules or interpretations of Hindu Law or all 
customs and usages and all other laws in force immediatley before 
the commencement of this Act, in so far as they may be inconsistent 
with this Act, shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, cease to have 
effect.” 

I have another amendment, Sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is it necessary ? 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : That is more elaborate. I beg to move : 

For clause 4, substitutes the following : 

“4. All texts relating to and all rules of interpretation of Hindu 
Law in the sacred books or in judicial pronouncement or superior 
courts in India or of the Judicial committee of the Privy Council or 
in the text books and commentaries of learned writers and authors or 
otherwise, and all customs and usages in force immediatley before the 
commencement of this Code, in so far as they are inconsistent with this 
Code, shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, cease to have effect.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : This is in another form. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : It is in a more elaborate form, containing 
more elements. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is different in substance. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Though in minor details. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendments moved : 

For clause 4, substitute the following : 

“4. All texts, rules or interpretations of Hindu Law or all customs 
and usages and all other laws in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Act, in so far as they may be inconsistent 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1234 


1234 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

with this Act, shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, cease to have 
effect.” 

For clause 4, substitute the following : 

“4. all texts, rules or interpretations of Hindu Law in the sacred books 
or in judicial pronouncement of superior courts in India or of the Judicial 
Committee of the Privy Council or in the text books and commentaries 
of learned writers and authors or otherwise, and all customs and usages 
in force immediatley before the commencement of this code, in so far 
as they are inconsistent with this Code, shall, to the extent of the 
inconsistency, cease to have effect.” 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : I beg to move : 

To clause 4, add the following proviso : 

“Provided, however, that this Code shall not override any text, rule 
or interpretation of Hindu Law, or any custom or usage or any other 
law in force, immediately prior to the commencement of this Code which 
has the sanction of Hindu religion or any other religion to the followers 
of which religion or religions this Code will apply : 

Provided further that this Code shall not override such existing text, 
rule or interpretation of Hindu Law, or any custom or usage or any 
other law in force which has sanction of morality behind it.” 

Sir, then I have another amendment. No. 418. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Is it a repetition of No. 130? 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : This is not a repetition but slightly different. 
I beg to move : 

In the amendment proposed by Dr. Ambedkar, to the proposed 
clause 4, add the following Proviso : 

“Provided that this Code shall not override such existing usage, custom 
and law as form part of the distinct culture of any section of the people 
to whom this Code applies.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Who is to decide what the distinct culture 
is ? Whatever may be the substance so far as any Code is concerned, 
before I put it to the House, there must be some definite thing which 
is enforceable in a Court of Law. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : That is found in Article 29 of the Constitution 
that different sections of society have got different culture and that 
should be conserved. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1235 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1235 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member wants distinct culture to 
be established in a court of law. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : It is in the Constitution itself. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There is no definition of culture as there is a 
definition of custom as it is provided for here. I am not aware if there 
is any judicial interpretation of what distinct culture is up till now. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : That is already in the Constitution. 

Shri Santhanam : It must be in the directive principles. 

Dr. Ambedkar : It must be somewhere in the directive principles or 
it might be in the provisions relating to religion and so on. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : amendments moved : 

To clause 4, add the following Proviso : 

“Provided, however, that this Code shall not override any text, rule or 
interpretation of Hindu Law, or any custom or usage or any other law 
in force, immediately prior to the commencement of this Code which has 
the sanction of Hindu religion or any other religion or any other religion 
to the followers of which religion or religions this Code will apply ; 

Provided further that this Code shall not override such existing text, 
rule or interpretation of Hindu Law, or any custom or usage or any other 
law in force which has sanction of morality behind it. 

In the amendment proposed by Dr. Ambedkar, to the proposed clause 4, 
add the following Proviso : 

Provided that this Code shall not override such existing usage, custom 
and law as form part of the distinct culture of any section of the people 
to whom this Code applies.” 

Shri Sarwate (Madhya Bharat) : I beg to move : 

To clause 4, add the following Proviso : 

“Provided that the Legislature of a State may, by legislation passed 
by a majority of the total number of its or their members, provide that 
any of the provisions of this Act shall not apply to that State, or shall 
apply to that State with such modifications, as may be included in the 
legislation.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : How does it arise in this clause ? Any 
amendment must be relevant to the clause that is on hand. 

Shri Sarwate : Because this would supersede all laws which are 
inconsistent. As the clause stands at present, it has the effect of 
superseding all the laws which the State might have passed before. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1236 


1236 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

By this amendment I wish to give them the power, if they so wish, 
in future to restore them. There may be certain provisions which 
may not be applicable to the State. That State, if otherwise it has 
the power under the Constitution to legislate, should have the power 
and it should not be precluded from further legislating on this matter 
owing to the effect of this clause. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I do not understand what this amendment 
means. This amendment at any rate, must have relation to clause 1. 
Then, I think we have disposed of a similar amendment with reference 
to clause 2. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Pandit Malaviya’s amendment was more or less 
to the same effect. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Apart from this, this is a concurrent subject. 
If the local conditions and circumstances require a State Legislature 
to make any law, that law has to recieve the assent of the President. 
If it receives the assent of the President, to that extent, the provincial 
law will override or modify this law. That provision is there in the 
Constitution. I do not know how far we can make a law here which 
will override or remove the need for the President’s assent in a 
concurrent subject. A provincial legislation cannot have overriding 
effect unless the President’s consent is there. Indirectly, we are now 
trying to say that notwithstanding the need for the President’s consent 
under the Constitution, a provincial legislature can pass a law even 
in a concurrent subject. How can you do away, with the right of the 
President. I think it seems to be unconstitutional. 

Shri Sarwate : The provisions of the Constitution are not 
superseded ; they also go along with this. If for a provincial legislation 
that pre-condition is necessary, that pre-condition is attached. It does 
not mean that that is taken away. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It does away with the wholesome provision 
that there ought not to be any inconsistency between the laws passed 
by the Central legislature and by the State legislature. The state 
legislature could not be clothed with power, except in exceptional 
circumstances, to make such laws. The President must give his 
consent. I do not know how we can pass provision overriding all this. 
On these grounds it has already been voted upon by the House under 
clause 2 ; it also militates against the provisions in the Constitution. 
Is it necessary that we should take up this amendment ? Any other 
amendment ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1237 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1237 

Dr. C. D. Pande (Uttar Pradesh) : I have an amendment, sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Already tabled ? 

Dr. C. D. Pande : Already tabled, but not listed so far. I have got a copy. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have not got a copy. 

Dr. C. D. Pande : At least I have been supplied with one copy. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : When was notice given ? 

Dr. C. D. Pande : I gave notice in the Notice office this morning and 
they have given me this copy. This has got to be moved. In any case, the 
office has given this copy to me ; it may have been given to the Hon. Law 
Minister as well. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendments will be pouring in everyday in the 
morning. This is only the first of its kind. We had similar amendments also. 
I do not propose to waive the notice for such amendments unless the Hon. 
Minister sponsoring the Bill is willing to accept them. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : With your permission. Sir, I beg to 
move amendment No. 420 in my name. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The same amendment in another form. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : There is difference. Tthere is a small 
error here ; it is wrongly typed. It should be “in so far as it is inconsistent”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : That has been provided for. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : That has not been provided for. The 
original clause 4 says : 

“Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Code, etc ” 

These words are not there. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The words are there : 

“Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Code.” 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I say that so far as this Code goes, 
any custom shall cease to have effect. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The matters must have been dealt with in this Bill. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : That is not necessary. We make a 
provision that custom is saved and by the force of that section, custom is 
saved. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Let us see what the objection is in principle. 
What this clause wants to do is whatever may be the custom, in so 
far as it is provided for by this Bill, the provisons of this Code will 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1238 


1238 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

have to prevail except in so far as a specific reservation is made. What 
is his objection ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : This is an amendment to the old 
clause 4. There is no question of inconsistency etc. there. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Only in cases where it is inconsistent, the 
Law must override. If it is not, it may continue. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : This is an amendment to the 
original clause 4. It is quite different from the new clause 4. If you adopt 
the amendment moved by Dr. Ambedkar, then, it may be unnecessary. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is my amendment. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I am in agreement with your 
amendment; but I have given a different amendment. 

Dr. Ambedkar : What is before the House is my amendment. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : The original clause 4 does not 
consider the question of inconsistency at all. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am not able to follow the need for this 
amendment. 

Shri Santhanam : He wants to restore the original wording that 
the custom should be invalid to the extent of inconsistency. 

Dr. Ambedkar : We have never used the word ‘inconsistent’ even 
in the original clause. The original clause was : 

“Save as otherwise expressly provided in this Code, any text, rule, 
or interpretation of Hindu Law, or any custom or usage or any other 
law in force immediately prior to the commencement of this Code 
shall cease to have effect as respects any of the matters dealt with 
in this Code.” 

It was an absolute thing with regard to law and custom. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : In clause 4 as it stood in the 
original Bill, there is no reference to inconsistency. It is absolute. My 
amendment seeks to amend the clause in two ways : in the first place 
these words are not there : ‘save as expressly provided etc.’. Secondly, 
the question of inconsistency is absent in the original clause. Then 
all customs and texts of Hindu Law shall prevail but to the extent 
of inconsistency only they would not have effect. Otherwise whatever 
is provided in this Act will have effect. With your permission. Sir, 
I move amendment No. 420, with this correction. I beg to move : 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1239 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1239 

For clause 4, substitute the following : 

“4. Any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law and any law, custom 
or usage in force immediatley before the commencement of this Code 
shall in so far as it is inconsistent cease to have effect with respect to 
the matters dealt with in the Code.” 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment moved : 

“4. Any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law and any law, custom 
or usage in force immediately before the commencement of this Code 
shall in so far as it is inconsistent cease to have effect with respect to 
the matters dealt with in the Code.” 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : I beg to move : 

In the amendment proposed by Dr. Ambedkar, in part (a) of the 
proposed clause 4, after the words “this Code”, where it occurs for the 
second time, insert the words “in so far as it is inconsistent with any 
of the provisions contained in this Code”. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : In part (a) ? 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Yes. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The object of the Law Minister seems to be 
that once a particular matter is dealt with here, you need not go to any 
other Code. But the suggestion of the amendment seems to be that it is 
only in cases where the provisions are inconsistent with the provisons 
of the Code that the code provisions will prevail. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : That is exactly my point. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Amendment moved : 

In the amendment proposed by Dr. Ambedkar, in part (a) of the 
proposed clause 4, after the words “this Code”, where it occurs for the 
second time insert the words “in so far as it is inconsistent with any of 
the provisions contained in this Code”. 

And so the following amendments have been moved : 

No. 6 of Dr. Ambedkar, No. 450 of Dr. Deshmukh, No. 129 of Sardar 
Hukam Singh, Nos. 128, 420 and 449 of Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava, 
Nos. 380 and 419 of Shri Naziruddin Ahmad, Nos. 130 and 418 of Shri 
Jhunjhunwala and No. 417 of Shri Symnandan Sahaya. 

These amendments and the clause are now thrown open for discussion. 

Dr. Deshmukh : This is a very important clause and it has assumed 
greater importance because the provisions of the present law are going 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1240 


1240 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to be limited only to those related to marriage and divorce. It was for 
that reason that I was going to say, so far as clause 3 was concerned, 
that there was not any very great need for a definition of the words 
“custom and usage”. Also I thought that so far as marriage and divorce 
were concerned, there was the prevailing opinion that custom should 
not be taboo and should not be prevented from operation to the same 
extent as might have been the case if we were to include inheritance 
and succession in the provisions of the Code. So I thought that since 
we were going to limit this now only to marriage and divorce, insisting 
on defining custom and usage and also making provisions in clause 4 
were not of such great impotrtance. Therefore, I was suggesting that the 
definition also should be omitted from clause 3. so far as the wording 
of the definition is concerned. I am in complete agreement with the 
learned Doctor, because it is aboslutely identical with the rulings on 
the subject and there is not a single word there which can be objected 
to. In fact, if anything, it liberalises (Shrimati Durgabai in the Chair) 
and widens the scope, for it extends to anything uniformly observed for 
a long time and it gives recognition even to family customs. From that 
point of view there is nothing objectionable about the definition. But so 
far as most of the provisions in the present Bill are concerned. I would 
like the Hon. Minister to view the whole thing as early as possible from 
this point, namely that the provisions are now going to be limited only 
to marriage and divorce. Now as he had himself admitted, there are 
many things here in this Bill, many provisions which were intended 
specifically to govern other provisions in a particular manner, I would 
like him to view even some of the provisions to which we are going to 
confine ourselves from this point of view. If he does that I think some 
modifications would be necessary even in this clause which gives the 
overriding effect to this law as against custom and usage as well as 
interpretation of Hindu law prevalent at the moment. 

If we pass the clause as suggested by Dr. Ambedkar’s amendment we 
would certaiinly be going further than what was, I believe, intended. 
Sub-clause (a) of clause 4 reads : 

“Any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law or any custom or 

usage in force immediately before the commencement of this Code shall 

cease to have effect with respect to any of the matters dealt with in 

this Code.” 

If it is correctly interpreted, it would mean that all custom 
and usage so far as marriage and divorce are concerned will 
be barred, because they are matters dealt with in this Code. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1241 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1241 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : Unless specially saved. 

Dr. Deshmukh : I fully agree with the amendment notice of which 
has been given by my friend Mr. Sahaya. Since you put these words 
here, so long as you legislate on the subject of marriage and divorce, 
as far as I can understand, it would not be possible to recognise any 
custom or usage. 

Dr. Ambedkar : We are saving some things. 

Dr. Dsehmukh : Not unless the saving is put down. 

Dr. Ambedkar : The clause begins with the words “Save as otherwise 
expressly provided”. 

Dr. Deshmukh : So far as my view of the matter is concerned, as 
regards marriage and divorce, custom should have the play. We have 
the instance of the Punjab, which is being governed more by custom 
than by specific legal provisions. 

Dr. Ambedkar : We want to raise the people of the Punjab to our 
standard. 

Dr. Deshmukh : From that point of view I have tabled an amendment 
to omit the words “any custom or usage” so that any custom or usage 
which does not contravene or which answers the requirements of clause 3 
should prevail and continue. If this is not done, I am afraid, any other 
provisions in the subsequent clauses will not help us. According to my 
understanding, if part (a) of clause 4 is adopted as it is, even where it 
is the wish of the House that custom and usage should be recognised 
side by side with the provisions of the law, it will not be possible to 
clothe them with that recognition. Therefore it would be best to omit 
the words “any custom or usage”. Some of my friends have gone to 
the extent of saying that it should override the provisions of the law 
everywhere, as has been suggested by Pandit Bhargava. That would 
probably be something which is absolutely contrary to clause 4. It 
would be tantamount not only to the omission of the clause but would 
be putting it in the opposite direction. 

Shri J. R. Kapoor : It would be a negation of the Code itself. 

Dr. Deshmukh : I agree that it would be a nagation of the Code. 
My submission is that there would be ample room for the continuance 
of any recognised customs and usages so long as we do not bar them 
by this enactment. I do not think it would be correct to leave the 
sub-clause (a) as it is. The original clause was to the effect that any 
custom or usage or any other law in force immediately before the 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1242 


1242 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

commencement of the Code shall cease to have effect as respects any 
of the matters dealt with in this Code. From that we have modified 
the position slightly, so long as we limit the law only to marriage 
and divorce. I would like that usage and custom should be allowed 
to prevail because it has stood the test of time, it is more convenient 
and less expensive, and it is likely to be less oppressive to the people. 
I submit there is everything to be said in favour of the amendment 
I have moved. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : I have moved my amendment whose purport 
is identical with the amendment Dr. Deshmukh has moved. I entirely 
associate myself with what my learned friend has just now said, but 
in addition to that I have to submit certain other points. In clause 3 
we have just defined custom and usage; how we have exalted it and 
dignified it is apparent form the words used : 

“the expressions ‘custom’ and ‘usage’ singly any rule which, having 
been contibuously and uniformly observed for a long time, has obtained 
the force of law among Hindus in any local area, tribe, community, 
group or family : 

Provided that the rule is cerain and not unreasonable or opposed to 
public policy”. 

I beg to submit that when we have laid down a definition and have 
restricted what actually a usage or custom is for it to be recognisd, 
immediately after that we deal a fatal blow to it in clasue 4. 

An hon. Member : There is saving. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : There is saving — everywhere, in every 
clause you say, save something which is deemed proper. But I look at 
it the other way. It should not mean that for every clause wherever 
an exception is deemed necessary a saving clause should be added 
saying that such-and-such a custom should be saved. Why not save 
it aboslutlely when it has the status of law ? It cannot be imagined 
that it is so vague, so uncertain or so indefinite that you cannot reach 
at it or find it out. It is not only on the lips or in the hearts of the 
people in general, but I lay claim to this fact also that it is already 
laid down in public documents and it cannot be changed arbitrarily. 
If somebody were to say that it might lead to litigation, then I can 
lay the counter-charges that even in codified laws there are always 
disputes, even in registered documents and registered facts there are 
disputes. I might read form Mayne : 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1243 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1243 

“The Rivaj-i-Am is a public record, prepared by a public officer in 
the discharge of his duties under Governmet rules. The statements 
therein may be accepted even if unsupported by instances. Manuals 
of customary law in accordance with the Rivaj-i-Am have been issued 
by authority for each district.” 

So, those customs are not carried orally that there can be dispute 
about them ; they are contained in public documents. At each 
settlement they are revised and scrutinised to see that everything 
is correct according to the custom that prevails. There is no danger 
about it. My fear is that we have been governed so long by a very 
simple law. We are told that it is now too late in the day that 
Punjabis should rise up and say that they are not governed by 
Hindu law. Of course, that is our claim. The Punjab Laws Act, 
clause 5, does define that we have been governed by customary law 
in preference to the Hindu law. Everybody knows the customary law 
and understands it well. 

Dr. Ambedkar : This is much simpler than customary law. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : We are told in one breath that we have 
so long been governed by Hindu law — well and good — but in another 
breath we are told that that was not the proper Hindu law. Hindu 
law is now rediscovered and a Code is being brought and thrust 
upon us. The law-giver says that this is the Hindu law. Where is the 
guarantee that this discovery might not lead to another after a few 
years and we may not be confronted with the statement that the law 
then being propounded was the correct one and everybody else who 
went before it had made a mistake. If it is progressiveness, we claim 
that our customs are more progressive than the law which is being 
proposed now. If progress is to be the criterion, then I say : don’t 
touch us. If you wish to move forward, we are already in advance 
of you. Come after us. Even in regard to marriage and divorce, we 
are far in advance of you. Do not pull us back. Laws should refect 
the stage to which the society has advanced and if the law-giver 
now thinks that we have advanced to this stage only now, then he 
is mistaken. If it is only for the sake of bringing about uniformity, 
then too I am afraid he would not succeed. The variations in the 
customs and usages, in the cultures and languages, cannot be blended 
together in so short a time. 

An appeal was made to the Sikhs yesterday that they should 
forget the old days and try to become part of the nation. That is 
a thing that we would cherish. We are not opposed to it. but if 
Dr. Ambedkar cares to listen to me ... 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1244 


1244 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Sardar B. S. Man (Punjab) : He is talking to somebody, he does not 
bother to consult us. He does not bother about our opinion. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : I find he has turned to me now. 

We were reminded yesterday and an appeal was addressed to us 
yesterday that we should try to become part of the nation ; that we 
should have no tendencies to remain separate. That was very good of 
him and I thank him wholeheartedly. We are prepared to come forward 
and meet him more than half way but I would just remind him, as 
I did yesterday, that he should begin at the Government and at the 
Cabinet itself, he ought to advise the President that he should not make 
discriminations when he issues orders, and I particularly referred to the 
Scheduled Castes Order of 1950, 

Dr. Ambedkar : I think my hon. Friend may legitimately criticise the 
Government, but I think he ought not to bring in the President, because 
whatever the President does he does on the advice of the Ministry and 
I would be quite prepared to bear all the criticism that he wishes to 
direct against me. 

Mr. Chairman : I think this point has been made clear on a former 
occason when the Deputy Speaker told the House that the President’s 
views are not to be canvassed or criticised on the floor of the House. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : Perhaps I have not been heard. I said that 
Dr. Ambedkar should ‘advise’ the President. I think I am within my 
rights in saying that. I am not criticising the actions of the President. I 
am only requesting Dr. Ambedkar to advise the President. He has been 
advised by Dr. Ambedkar and other Ministers, and I am requesting 
Dr. Ambedkar to advise him. My appeal to Dr. Ambedkar is that he 
should beg at home. 

Sardar B. S. Man : On a point of order, Madam. Some doubt has 
arisen in my mind. Since the actions of the President are under the 
advice of the Government, supposing that an action of the President is 
such that it gives rise to a complaint in the House, particularly at this 
moment when the Punjab is being governed directly by the President, 
is it not open to me to question the advisability or validity of certain 
orders of the President which to my mind are unjust ? In that case it will 
not be possible for me to question the actions of the President as such. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am quite certain about it. Even if my hon. friend 
has an occasion to criticise any of the orders that have been issued by 
the President, it would not be open to him to criticise the President, he 
can censure the government if he likes. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1245 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1245 

Sardar B. S. Man : Even when the orders are issued directly by 
the President ? Of course, the constitutional presumption is there that 
these orders are issued on the advice of the Cabinet. The situation in 
the Punjab is that it is governed directly by the President. Of course the 
responsibility for any orders issued by him would fall on the Cabinet, 
but when the orders of the President are to be discussed, how can I 
refer to them except as orders of the President ? 

Mr. Chairman : The Constitution very definitely says that everything 
that the President does shall be on the advice of his Council of Ministers 
and that explains every act of the President. 

Sardar B. S. Man : Suppose I want to refer to the orders made by the 
President in relation to Punjab, I can only refer to them as the orders 
of the President, though the presumption remains that they are made 
by the President on the advice of his Cabinet. I would like to have a 
clear ruling from you on that point. 

Mr. Chairman : I think the point has been made claear already by 
Dr. Ambedkar and whatever explanation he has given applies to this 
category of orders as well, to which the Hon. Member has just referred. 

There are two positions; one is that the President are not to be 
criticised, the other is that the President, whatever he does, does it on 
the advice of his Cabinet. If these two are taken into consideration, the 
conclusion will be that even though his actions are based on the advice 
of the Cabinet, yet thery are not to be criticised. 

Sardar B. S. Man : Even if they are unconstitiutional — even if they 
are bad ? I can always say that this advice which has been tendered to 
the President is bad advice. 

Mr. Chairman : We have accepted the provison in the Constitution 
that the President’s actions are not to be criticised. 

Sardar B. S. Man : We can even move a no-confidence motion 

Dr. Ambedkar : You can move a no-confidence motion in the 
Government, not the President. 

Shri Damodar Menon (Travancore-Cochin) : Has not this House a 
right to impeach the President ? 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is a separate matter altogether. 

Mr. Chairman : I would, in this connection, refer the House to clause (VI) 
of Rule 159 of our Rules of Procedure which says : 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1246 


1246 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“A member while speaking shall not — , 

* * (vi) use the President’s name for the purpose of influencing the 

debate;” 

Sardar B. S. Man : In fact, it is the Government that is using 
the name of the President. When I criticise certain actions of the 
President, the odium attached to them may be of the government or 
the advisers of the President. It is up to the people to pass it on to 
wherever it belong. But when the orders issued are of the President, 
criticism ought to be in the name of the President. Because, at 
present in the Punjab we are being governed by the President, am I 
to forego the right of criticism ? It may close the door for all future 
time to come. That is my point. 

Mr. Chairman : My own personal feeling is that if Hon. Members 
are not prevented from criticising, as they are doing it in the House, 
they may direct their criticism to the government who are giving 
bad advice — if it is bad advice in their opinion. If the Government 
is at the bottom of the President’s action, if in their opinion it is 
not the President who is acting but it is the government which is 
tendering bad advice, it is aboslutely open to the Members to criticise 
the Government on their actions without bringing the name of the 
President. 

Dr. Deshmukh : Can we also say that we are not criticising the 
President and that we are criticising the Government ? 

Mr. Chairman : Therefore, where is the difficulty? When the 
Members are free to criticise the actions of the Government and 
there is absolutley no bar to their expressing their views frankly 
and openly, they need not feel or suffer from the trouble that they 
are not able to bring in the name of the President directly. 

Sardar B. S. Man : We are not bringing the name of the President 
but the actions of the President, as they are the actions of the 
Government. It is for you to presume just as it is for me to criticise. 

Mr. Chairman : I think I have made the point quite clear. If it 
is in their mind that it is the Government that is at the bottom 
of the President’s action and that is not advising properly, if the 
Government is the subject matter of the attack, they are absolutely 
free to attack the Government. Nothing bars them. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : I am sorry that my appeal has been lost 
in this discussion that took place over the question whether we can 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1247 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1247 

criticise the President or not. But my purpose is not to criticise the 
President at all. He is not to blame so far as my point is concerned. 
I bring the charge directly against Dr. Ambedkar, because he made 
an appeal to me and other Sikhs that we should not think in such 
separatist terms. But the blame lies on the other side. He has 
started this game and kept us at a distance when he was advising 
the President to make that order about scheduled castes. That is my 
complaint. Before he makes an appeal to me that I should change 
my mind, he should begin from his own sphere and remove that 
injustice. That was my first point. 

The second point is when we submit that custom in Punjab is 
much simpler and much more easily understood by the average 
citizen, we are confronted with this question whether we want 
monogamy or not. That is not the question. Monogamy we do 
want. We support and welcome it. Everybody wants monogamy. 
Nobody is against it. Already public opinion is so strong that now 
normally all people are for monogamy. Moreover the economic 
condition of the country is such that nobody can now bear the 
burden of more than one wife. There is no denying the fact that 
it is not possible for an ordinary man now, except those that are 
placed in a privleged position like our Doctor himself, to have a 
second wife. Therefore no question arises about monogamy. Even 
if it comes we are not against monogamy, we welcome it. But the 
question is that there are other things that will follow. There are 
prohibited degrees. There are other ceremonies. So far as Punjab 
is concerned, our prohibited degrees are much fewer. You are 
contracting it by this Bill and you will have to contract it further. 
Though we are not passing the protion relating to inheritance at 
this moment, it is contemplated to pass it in the near future. If 

you want that the girl should have a share along with her 
1 P.M. J & & 

brother, then this long list of prohibited degrees cannot 

remain. Obviously we would be compelled to contract it more and 
more unless you give inheritance to our cousins and sisters and 
others ( Interruption ) like Muslims certainly. Both the things have 
to go together and already in the Punjab custom, there is a list of 
prohibited degrees which is recognized and permitted by custom 
and if you are doing anything against that progress which you 
claim you are helping to proceed, surely you are bringing us back 
when we have gone so far forward. (An Hon. Member : Leading). 
Yes. We are leading the whole of India. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1248 


1248 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(Mr. Deputy Speaker in the Chair). 

So far as the other things are concerned, a short while ago the question 
arose when my esteemed friend, Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava moved his 
amendment that along with the adopted son, the appointed heir should 
be added, and this was opposed on the ground of certain objections and 
interruptions. The adopted heir is as good as an adopted son as in any 
other part of India. The only advancement or progress that is there is 
that no particular ceremonies are observed. The age is not restricted and 
so far as relationship is concerned, that is not restricted also. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Did not we decide that we will take the case of the 
adopted heir at a later stage ? I thought that the House agreed to that. 
When we were discussing clause 3 on the definition of son, Pandit Thakur 
Das Bhargava raised that qustion and I submitted to the house that 
this was a matter which may be considered later on at the appropriate 
stage either when we come to the conclusion 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : When we were in the definition. 

Dr. Ambedkar : My hon. Friend is referring to the adopted son. We 
have not come to that yet. I am only saying that we can save the time 
and get through clause 4. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : We agreed to put it off till Part VII. We can 
discuss this at a later stage when this matter comes up. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : This interruption of the Hon. Minister has 
created an apprehension in my mind that he is not following or I am 
not able to make mysef clear. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am following and I have caught this point that the 
whole of Punjab is very progressive as against all others. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : That he has caught all right but if I am giving 
the reasons and instances, he would not care to follow. I am giving an 
instance where the usage or custom is so necessary and I am saying 

Dr. Ambedkar : This part of my education will be better left out now. 
I will receive it at a later stage. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : That you will have to learn. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : It is not only the doctor himself who is to be 
educated, but there are others also. If I have to request Hon. Members 
to give their vote for me, I have to convince them 

Dr. Ambedkar : Later on. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : What is now suggested is that this 
discussion should be blocked. But in another place when the same 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1249 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1249 

matter was raised in clause 3 it was suggested with regard to the 
definition of a son that an adopted heir must also be a son. When we 
come to clause 7 where the prohibited degrees are narrated, it may be 
considered whether it should be included, or an explanation added. Let 
us take up this when we come to clause 7. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : I am extremely sorry that I have not been 
understood. What I wanted to say was this. I am only advocating that 
usage and custom should continue to override the law. In advocating that 
I am explaining the utility of usage and custom, the progress that it has 
made over law and why it should be retained and what differences there 
are between custom and other laws. In that connection I am referring 
to the son ; I am not trying to define ‘son’ or other people. That was 
my object. But, if the Doctor Saheb says that I should not continue, I 
will stop. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I was only saying that we may discuss this later on. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : We may discuss that later on. 

Sardar Hukam Singh : Then, I was submitting, Sir, that so far as 
custom and usage in the Punjab is concerned, it is recognised and well 
understood. It has continued to override the Hindu Law as was understood 
by the common man or even by lawyers and law-givers. There is no 
reason why, when it has been overriding Hindu Law for such a long 
time, has stood the test of time, has stood the test of scrutiny of judicial 
pronouncements and other tests, it should now be abrogated because a 
new law has been discovered and that is being given by another law-giver 
it should continue. It has been definite. It is reasonable. It has stood 
the test of time and has been uniform. As I have already submitted it 
is contained in public documents and can easily be ascertained. There 
can be no ambiguity about it. Therefore I submit that these word ‘usage 
or custom’ should be omitted from this clause. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava. 

Dr. Ambedkar : If I may plead. Sir, I would like this clause to be 
put to the House before we disperse, if the House permits. 

Some hon. Members : No, no ; this is a very contentious clause. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I am giving opportunity to the Members who 
have moved amendments. First Dr. Deshmukh, then Sardar Hukam Singh, 
and then Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava; there are then Mr. Naziruddin 
Ahmad and Mr. Jhunjhunwala. I am afraid it will not be possible with 
the best of intentions. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>26-12-2013 


1250 


1250 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Some hon. Members : This is a very controversial clause. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I think we must sit tomorrow. We shall be 
sitting tomorrow also. 

Some hon. Members : Yes, yes. 

Some hon. Members : No, no. 

Capt. A. P. Singh : Tomorrow we must have a holiday. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : There is so much of work in the Order Paper. 
We have not even finished clause 4. There are 55 clauses in all, in this 
chapter. In these circumstances, I am afraid we will have to sit tomorrow. 

Capt. A. P. Singh : We have got to study so much about this Bill 
and about so many other things. We should have some time. 

Mr. Deput Speaker : There are no questions tomorrow. I have no 
objection to sitting from 9-30. We will sit at 9-30 a.m. This will be the 
only work tomorrow. 

Some hon. Members : Yes. 

An hon. Member : Up to ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : 1-15 as usual. 

An hon. Member : 9-30 to 2 O’clock. 

Pandit Maitra (West Bengal) : Up to 12 O’clock, Sir. We have got 
other work. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : This is the most contentious clause 
in the whole Bill (interruptions). Sir, I was submitting that clause 4 is 
the most contentious clause in the whole Bill. As a matter of fact while 
we were considering clause 2 which took so much time of the House, 
the contentions were really such as appertained to clauses 4. Human 
nature as we know it, loves its own customs. In societies where the law- 
making power is not fully evolved the conduct of the people is governed 
by customs, and custom gets fixed in the affections of the people and its 
seat is deep in the hearts of people to such an extent that people love it 
in preference to imposed law. Therefore, the question which is put to us 
when we go out into the country is “Are our customs to be safe or not ?” 
a few days ago I was in the house of one of my friends who happens to 
be a Minister of the Govrnment of India and his orderly asked me. “What 
are you doing, Sir, with regard to the Hindu Code ?” I told him that 
the Hindu Code Bill was being discussed and some portions of it will be 
passed. The very next question that he puts me is, “Will it do away with 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1251 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1251 

our divorce custom ? “that was the question that he asked me. I 
told him, “Well, it is likely that the divorce provision will be passed 
and so far as the customs were concerned, those, customs would 
be recognised only if they stand a special test and all customs 
would not be continued. He was not happy. He wanted that his 
own custom whether it be reasoanable or not, may be recognised 
and fully given effect to. Sir, that is really what is in the minds 
of the people now. All the same, so far as this House is concerned 
and so far as the representatives of the people are concerned, we 
are anxious that custom should come into this law only to a certain 
extent. We want that such customs as have gone very deep in the 
affections of the people should be continued. So far as South India is 
concerned we know that there are certain connections and manages 
there which are regarded as very objectionable in North India, but 
they are considered right and proper in South India. They should 
not be interfered with. Similarly, Sir, there are some customs or 
well-established practices in other parts of India and no person 
would say that they should be interferred with. In this connection 
I would illustrate my point by reference to a custom that is very 
widely prevalent among the agricultural classes in the Punjab and 
which is going to be disturbed by some of the provisions that we 
are making here. There a certain kind of marrage is performed 
called the Kareva marriage. If a man dies his wodow is married 
to his younger brother or to any person who is of the same status 
as a brother even though this brother may be of the same age or 
younger than the woman. In some sections she is married to the 
elder brother also, but that is not the practice in other sections. 
Now, in that form of marriage you do not have the usual marriage 
procedure, the “Sapta pada” and all that. They just go through 
a customary rite and the marriage is considered as having been 
performed. The final result of this practice is that neither the 
property nor the woman goes out of the family and also the children 
from the previous husband are properly looked after. And this custom 
has been prevailing among these people from very ancient times. 
The upper-class Hindus are now adopting gradually this custom of 
widow-marriage. This sort of widow remarriage which is practised 
by the agriculturists in the Punjab is being adopted by the upper- 
class Hindus also. So the custom now is that even if the younger 
brother of the deceased has a wife living, he will have to marry 
the widow of his elder brother and they live as husband and wife. 
This is practically a case of bigamy according to the Hindu Code. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1252 


1252 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : How ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: The younger brother may have his 
wife living and according to custom the widow of the elder brother is 
married to the younger brother even though he may have a previous 
wife by marriage. ( Interruptions ). 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: There are certain customs prevalent in 
particular parts which accroding to them are valid and not unusual. 
Let us not show any kind of derision or disagreement by any visible 
representation such as laughter lest we should wound their feelings. 
I only put the question for the purpose of knowing the details of it so 
that the House may understand the position. 

The hon. Member may continue his speech tomorrow. 

The House then adjourned till Half Past Nine of the Clock on Saturday, 
the 22nd September, 1951. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 1253 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1253 

* HINDU CODE — contd. 

*Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : ( English translation of the Hindi 
speech). Sir, an hon. Member has expressed the desire that I should 
speak in Hindi. In deference to that I wish to express myself through 
the medium of that language. 

As I was submitting yesterday before the House, our customs are of 
very heterogeneous character. They are so different from one another 
that a custom considered to be good in one part of the country may 
be thought of as a very reprehensible one in another. So we should 
proceed about this Bill very cautiously. Yesterday I mentioned the 
Kareva form of marriage at which some hon. Members had laughed. 
This custom is prevalent to a great extent in Punjab and Oudh and 
it is not a matter of laughing. If you judge it from the point of view 
of high ideals of Hindu society, it is possible that some of the hon. 
Members may not like the Kareva form of marriage because according 
to the ancient standards the wife of the elder brother is to be treated 
as mother. According to Ramayana when Lakshmana’s mother gave 
her consent to his going with Rama in his exile, she said : 

“Ramam Dasharatham viddhi, mam viddhi Janakatmajam; 

Ayodhyamatvim viddhi, gachhtat yathasukham.” 

She asked Lakshmana to look upon Rama as his father and Sita as 
herself i.e., like his mother, and think that the jungle was Ayodhya. 
Such was the high ideal of our society. How many young men are 
prepared to go in exile at the orders of their fathers ? How many 
men respect an elder brother like a father ? Such behaviour is ideal. 
As far as the customs prevalent in society are concerned, even our 
Shashtras have ordained that the younger brother of the husband is 
Dwivar the second, prospective husband. In many cases the Shastras 
have permitted men to marry the wives of their elder brothers, after 
their (brothers) death. There is nothing surprising in that. I am 
conversant with the customs prevalent in Madras and other States. 
I toured the whole of India in the capacity of a member of the Age 
of Consent Committee and enquired into the various customs. That 
is why I say that we have a number of customs of different character 
and I need not dwell over their intricacies. One should not inquire 
the feelings of a sect, the feelings which form the basis of a particular 
custom. I want to submit that there is no good reason to laugh at 
this Kareva system of marriage. In fact, many advantages accrue from 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 22nd September 1951, pp. 3072-82. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1254 


1254 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

this system and those communities that have followed this custom 
for many centuries have benefited from it to a great extent. For 
example, in old days and even now in India, when a girl is married 
in a certain family, she becomes a member of that family, though 
she is married to one individual. Whatever share of property she 
gets becomes a part and parcel of that family’s property. An effort is 
made to retain the property and her share in the family, and after 
her husband’s death the responsibility of bringing up her children 
devolves on the family as a whole. This is the basis of the Kareva 
system. By following this, she by getting married to her husband’s 
younger brother or his cousin continues to be a member of the family 
even after her husband’s death. In this way her children by her first 
husband are brought up with the same love as before and are not 
inconvenienced in any way. The hon. Members are aware that such 
popular customs have been recognised in India. According to Section 2 
of the Widow Remarriage Act, 1856, if a widow marries again she loses 
all her rights in her husband’s property. I would invite the attention, 
specially of Hon. Dr. Ambedkar, to the fact that after remarriage a 
widow loses all her rights pertaining to maintenance or to her share 
in her former husband’s property. The obvious reason for this is that 
after remarriage, a widow becomes a member of another family. But 
by following Kareva system i.e. marrying her husband’s brother after 
his death, she retains her share in her former husband’s property. 
This custom is prevalent to a great extent in Jat Sikh communities 
in the Punjab. When the widow continues to be a member of her 
husband’s family by marrying his younger brother after his death, 
she does not lose her right over land. 

The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): Would this not be more 
relevant when we deal with the clause on marriage ? Now we are 
dealing in a general way. I have said that whenever each clause comes, 
to whatever extent it may be necessary that clause may be made 
subject to custom. I would only suggest to my friend that probably 
his remarks would be more relevant when we come to that part. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I have also been thinking of it. The 
amendments he has tabled seek that only those portions of the Bill 
must prevail where they are not inconsistent with custom, Then he 
wants certain customs to be saved. So far as these customs — which 
will be saved — are concerned, they may be more specifically referred to 
when we come to the relevant portion on marriage and divorce. With 
reference to the general question as to whether this should operate 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1255 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1255 

where there is inconsistency or whether it should generally operate 
where it deals with the matter, this is a matter which may be dealt 
with when we come to details. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Would the difference be very great ? supposing we 
say that any custom which is not inconsistent will be safe or we say 
“subject”, I think the effect would be the same. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The hon. Member need not go into the customs 
in extenso. A general indication of the custom is enough. We may dwell 
on the details when the relevant clause comes up. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava: I realize the force of Hon. 
Dr. Ambedkar’s objection. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I do not object. All I say is that it will be more 
relevant in the other context. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I will not dwell upon the details of 
any custom. As the Hon. Deputy Speaker said all the four amendments 
moved by me contradict one another. One of them is that custom should 
over-ride all laws and even prevail upon the Hindu Code Bill. I gave an 
example of our customs in order to impress upon this House that if we 
agree to the principle underlying this amendment, we lose our stand. I 
do not want that my amendment, saying that custom should override 
laws, be passed. It should be eliminated. I mentioned Kareva system in 
order to bring out the nature of our customs. Sir, I submit that I do not 
want that the House should try to keep this custom intact, I shall not 
press the House for the saving of those customs which I do not consider 
to be proper. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Would it not go against the very spirit of 
the Code ? (The object of this Code is to gather the varied customs and 
put them into a single Code). Hitherto, customs have not been codified. 
Some customs have been upheld by the courts and if we go on making 
exceptions, the whole law will become nebulous. The purpose of the 
Code itself will be frustrated. I think the Code seeks to incorporate the 
customs which have been upheld by courts and a presentable document 
is placed before the country which can be the basis for further additions, 
if necessary. But it will go against the very grain of this Bill if all the 
customs are exempted. Only in exceptional cases, special provisions 
should be made in regard to customs. I am not ruling the hon. Member 
out of order. Now that we have accepted the principle that we must 
codify certain matters, it follows that any custom which is inconsistent 
with this law must go. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1256 


1256 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : With all respect I beg to submit 
that I support each and every word of what the Hon. Deputy Speaker 
has said, because it is right and it tallies with what I mean by my 
remarks. For many a year, decisions have been made on the customary 
laws and customs of the Punjab, decisions which are in conformity 
with justice, equity and good conscience. Thousands of suits have 
been fought on the issue of our customs. So we should take them as 
a basis and follow such customs. 

Sir, you remarked that if we were to go on making exceptions in the 
case of every custom we would enter a nebulous state of things and 
the Code would become useless. I go a step further and submit that 
we should make exceptions in the case of those prevalent customs only 
which are considered to be right, such as the Kareva system which 
should be allowed to remain in operation for some time. In Madras 
and Bombay Acts there is a provision that customary dissolution of 
marriage would remain operative wherever it is prevalent. Where 
such customs are provided for, all customs should be either allowed 
to remain operative or be done away with. I take codification to be 
an attempt at improving bad customs. The hon. Dr. Ambedkar dose 
not agree with me. He wants to codify all customs. I appeal with 
all sincerity that while codifying we should retain only good things 
and leave out the bad ones. I am opposed to that kind of codification 
which would include even bad customs. It is not our intention to 
perpetuate bad customs through codification. (I want to make it 
clear from my amendment, that customs should prevail. I have also 
proposed that universal laws and principles should be given due 
importance, a scrutiny should be made with the purpose of judging 
as to what is needed and all advantages and just universal laws, 
usages and customs should be retained. 

If we want to codify our usages and customs, (I would like to 
point out that the most important of our customs is that we should 
not allow divorce). But we are going to give our women the liberty 
of divorce, because the Constitution and the sense of justice do not 
allow that women should lack this liberty. Go ahead and give them 
this right but bigamy is an established custom. It has been in vogue 
for many centuries and it is prevalent in some sections of our society. 
After the passage of this Bill and the enforcement of monogamy a 
person would not be able to marry another woman by the Kareva 
system as long as his first wife is alive. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1257 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1257 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The only point is this. In so far as the Kareva 
custom is concerned, it allows bigamy in particular circumstances. I 
think when we come to monogamy we can deal with that. But on general 
principles, the hon. Member can only say that this Code should be applied 
to all cases except that he may refer to some cases here and there by 
way of illustration to show that they may be exempted. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I have not touched upon any 
particular custom. I want only to show what is the place of custom in 
this code. Only to illustrate this, I mentioned the example. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I think the sponsor of the Bill feels that he 
has looked into all the customs and he has included all customs that, 
according to him, must have the sanction of law. Other hon. Members 
may feel that certain other customs prevail and exception must be made 
for them in the body of the Bill. If that is so, it should be done at the 
appropriate stage. At present we are on the general provision which 
says that any custom that is unwholesome and therefore inconsistent 
with this Code will go. Should we not make a provision like that saying 
that in so far as matters regulated by this code are concerned, such a 
custom shall not prevail and shall not have force ? What is relevant 
therefore on this clause is the general nature of the custom and a few 
illustrations here and there. Even if there be a single custom which has 
to be abrogated by this Bill, such a clause is necessary. We are now going 
into the root of the matter. As to whether a custom has been enjoying 
uniformity, continuity or is of ancient nature — those are matters which 
certainly can be looked into and if some additions are suggested by hon. 
Members those can be considered. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Had we been discussing the whole 
of the Code this clause would have been absolutely necessary. But we 
are going to pass only a chapter in which at every step it is provided 
that custom will prevail in such and such case. That is why I mentioned 
an example to show that such a custom has been prevailing for many 
centuries. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Even if there is a single unwholesome custom 
relating to marriage and divorce, this clause is necessary. For instance, 
the sponsor of the Bill feels that whatever might be the exceptions, a 
maternal uncle marrying his niece, that is a brother marrying his sister’s 
daughter should not be exempted. 

Dr. Ambedkar : We shall deal with that matter at the relevant stage. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1258 


1258 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Let us assume that the Law Minister 
feels that such a custom ought not to have the force of law, then 
we should have a general clause like this here. There are customs 
even with respect to marriage and divorce which have to be provided 
against, if they are unwholesome or opposed to public morality, or 
public interest or public policy. I do not see how you can get out of 
a general clause like this in some shape or form. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Sir, if you look into the list you 
will find that I have not given notice of any amendment with regard 
to the omission of Clause 4. But I have mentioned it and have given 
an example in order to know as to what place would we assign to 
custom in this general clause. I agree with Mr. Mayne when he says 
that custom is the first rule of decision. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The arguments are not confined to the 
restrictions that have to be made so far as clause 4 is concerned. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I beg to submit with due deference 
that clauses 3 and 4, where custom is defined, overlap each other. 
Yesterday, while I was discussing clause 3, Dr. Ambedkar quoted 
clause 4 in reply. Clauses 3 and 4 are overlapping and the mention 
of one leads to the mention of the other on account of similarity of 
context. 

As Sutras and Smritis say 

“Vedah vibhinnah smrityo vibhinnah naiko muniryasya vacha 

pramanam, Dharmasya tatvan nihitam guhayam mahajano yena gatah 

sa pantha.” 

[ Sruti says something and Smriti another. There is no sage whose 
word can be taken as final. The secret of Dharma (Duty) is very 
deep. Follow the path traversed by the great. ] 

I submit that custom has a special place and personal law has no 
meaning without custom, as is evident from clause 5 of the Punjab 
Laws Act, 1872. There are many rulings to the effect that custom 
has a place in personal law. I think while making personal laws we 
should assume custom to be there. Sir, in the Punjab, in the last 
one hundred years, all suits pertaining to agricultural communities 
have been assumed to be governed by agricultural customs. In a suit 
between urban parties, it is assumed that it would be governed by 
personal law. In fact, according to decisions of the Punjab Chief Court 
(107 of 1887, 100 of 1906 and several others), it has become a sort of 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1259 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1259 

law that there is no general custom except where the parties to a 
suit belong to the agriculturists communities and even in that case 
the onus of proof of a certain custom falls on the person who alleges 
it. Viewing the Hindu Code from this point I am of opinion that 
there should be no undue interference in any custom. Sir, yesterday 
I submitted that Hon. Dr. Ambedkar was preparing to adopt the 
customary basis of divorce as provided in Madras and Bombay Acts. 
I want to oppose this move. You should not spoil our divorce law 
by adopting that basis as it is the first time that we are making a 
divorce law. You are interfering in the social economy of upper class 
Indians. I am in favour of the divorce law. I have no hesitation in 
saying that we should have a single divorce law for the whole of 
the country. (I am with you in your efforts for the unification of the 
country). I know that in Punjab, to which I belong, and other parts 
of the country, about which I know something, divorce is so easy that 
there is a saying — “When the parties agree, they need no decree.” I 
do not want that divorce may be had just for the asking ; that will 
be highly unjust, there is a custom according to which the woman 
pays up the amount spent by her husband and gets a divorce. I am 
entirely against this custom, because this seeks to destroy our morality. 
I am taking up your time to voice my opinion, Hon. Dr. Ambedkar 
is not listening to me and is busy with his work. You should make a 
provision for some common and uniform grounds of divorce. Do not 
allow any custom to interfere in the matter of grounds of divorce or 
we would be in for a calamity. 

I would not countenance the provisions of the Bombay and Madras 
Acts. I am raising my voice against them not because I am an opponent 
of the Bombay and Madras Acts for so far as bigamy is concerned, 
I am as much against it as they are. The amendments of which I 
have given notice have only one purpose in view, that is, I am not 
ready to give go-by to the good principles that are contained in our 
laws relating to marriages, Dr. Ambedkar asked for acceptance of 
customary basis but every prevailing custom should not be accepted 
because if that were done, as has been done in this Bill, the whole 
purpose of the Hindu Code Bill would go to pieces. I want that there 
should only be one basis for divorce. If the responsibility lies with 
the husband, he should be required to provide for her expenses till 
the time of her remarriages. You will find from the Bill that although 
there is no customary basis for them yet it has been found pertinent 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1260 


1260 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

to make many rules that are in accordance with the rules prevailing 
in foreign countries. We have no quarrel with the rules of other 
countries. But I am against inclusion of every custom for there 
are unreasonable customs also. While customary basis has been 
so much command, I find three words — justice, equity and good 
conscience — absent. The customs that were immoral have been 
declared void by our High Courts for they were not just. If there 
are customs under the refuge of which a divorce is effected under 
pressure and if it is so proved, the High Courts would declare it 
as immoral although these customs exist together with others. But 
these very things that are not in fact based on justice and morality 
want to come through the backdoor under clause 4. Effort is being 
made for admittance of customs that would take out the very life 
of the Hindu Code. We are in no case going to accept them. We 
must put an end to these things of course. I have no objection for 
good and useful customs and those that may be very deep-rooted 
as, for example, the South Indian custom which you just referred, 
I have thus no objection to Aliyasanthanam Act which has been 
incorporated in 24(a). But the customs that have harmful effects 
should be given no place. The Hindu Law says that customs should 
be followed. In fact, customs are for Archaic society ; but for the 
advanced society, that keeps pace with the progress of the world, 
there are some universal principles which the Legislature embodies 
in the form of Acts and they should be our basis. This is why I 
emphasize that customs should not be brought in unnecessarily. 
That is what my amendment seeks to do. The purpose of my 
amendment No. 446 is to show at what dangerous spot would we 
reach if that clause were adopted. Otherwise, I have given notice 
of that amendment merely for discussion and not for acceptance. 
The rest of my amendments I have already placed. 

Under these circumstances I would emphatically request 
Dr. Ambedkar and the House that justice should be done and nobody 
should be put to unnecessary trouble. The Hon. Minister may do 
whatever he likes on the basis of justice, equity and good conscience — 
he may leave open as much field as he chooses on that basis. But 
whatever new legislation is enacted, it should be just. Of course, 
customs should have their proper place there ; but bad customs going 
against the fundamental prinicples should not be countenanced. We 
want to give customs their due place. We want to respect them so far 
as they are against those customs that lead us to immorality because 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1261 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1261 

such a custom is antagonistic to the Hindu Shastras and to our principles. 
There are, of course, differences on the application of divorce provision 
but I for one support it for I want justice for women who are meted out 
gross injustice these days. Poet Tulsidas had said through the mouth 
of Sitaji: 

Mitam dadati hi pita mitam hhrata mitam sutah, 

Amitasya to dataram Bharatram k a no pujyet. 

It means that the poor woman is economically dependent upon the 
husband and for that reason she worships him. This is, however, not in 
the interest of the society and is not in accordance with the principles 
of justice. Tulsidasji should better not have said that Whatever respect 
we may show towards Shri Ram Chandraji, or Shri Tulsidasji, I am not 
prepared to keep the women in bondage any longer. This principle of 
divorce is based upon one’s desire and upon the sense of equality and 
justice. I cannot close my eyes to the injustice that is being done to women. 
It is a daily occurrence now that young men leave their wives. I would 
ask them where are these sisters to go ? So I believe that divorce is a 
right provision. People refer to Satis. But has a man ever been a Sata ? 
Indeed, the prinicple of depriving the women of their rights prevailed 
in a gone-by age all over the world. The Married Women’s Property Act 
was passed in England in 1883. 

Shri T. N. Singh (Uttar Pradesh): What is meant by Sata ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : Do you not understand even the 
meaning of Sata ? All women know what is Sati but no man knows 
what Sati is. 

So my submission is that we should not make provisions on the basis 
of customs — bad customs surely. We should, on the other hand, take 
courage to abrogate customs — those old customs that have now beocme 
out-of-date. The Government should make legislation that should be 
based upon justice and equality. 

Shri Bhatt: Sir, an amendment of mine was left out due to my 
mistake. If you permit, I may move it now. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Is it already in the list ? What is the number ? 

Shri Bhatt: No. 288 in List No. 5. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Why was this not moved yesterday ? 

Shri Bhatt: I was not present at the right time. When I entered the 
House, the speech had begun. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 1262 

1262 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: He may move it. 

Shri Bhatt: I beg to move. 

In the amendment proposed by the hon. Dr. Ambedkar, in the proposed 
new clause 4, — 

(i) in part (a), after “dealt with in this Code” insert “after ten 
years from the commencement of this Code” ; and 

(ii) after part (b) add the Explanation: 

“Explanation . — Notwithstanding anything contained in sub-section 

(a), for a period of ten years from the commencement of this Code, any 

text, rule or any custom to usage in force, shall have effect. 

*Babu Ramnarayan Singh (Bihar): (English translation of the Hindi 
speech). Sir, today you have given me quite early the opportunity to 
speak on this dangerous subject and for this I thank you. Yesterday and 
the day before I tried to catch your eye several times and important 
as the subject was, I failed to get an opportunity to speak. May I 
make an observation in this connection that there is no doubt that you 
do full justice in your position about which nobody should have any 
misgiving 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya (Bihar): Nor anybody has. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : And, indeed, nobody has, But you have 
to give your rulings with an even hand. Yesterday you were pleased 
to say that there was some feeling prevalent against you and you 
wanted that no such feelings be created so that there may be general 
satisfaction about the working. It is but meet Sir, that thing should be 
done judiciously. But if somebody worries with the thought that people 
should regard him infallible on all occasions, he is likely to commit some 
mistakes. Therefore, I beg of you to do your part justly as you have 
been doing so far. You should not labour under the apprehension that 
people might think that you are not doing things rightly. 

Shri Jangde (Madhya Pradesh) : Please come to the subject. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh: I should also like to say one thing 
more. When I stood to speak, you in spite of the fact that no Member 
had expressed that desire declared that sufficient discussion had taken 
place on the subject and that the question be now put to decide upon 
the matter. However, I should draw your attention to the fact that the 
matter is very important. 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 22nd September 1951, pp. 3095-3112. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1263 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1263 

Shri Jangde: The hon. Member must now come to the subject. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: What I would say is it must be left to 
somebody to deicde whether the debate has been sufficient or not, and 
the Chair takes the responsibility. I called upon the Hon. the Law 
Minister to reply. It is no good referring to all those rulings when it 
is left to the Speaker to decide. I have now given an opportunity to 
the hon. Member. That was on the definition clause. This is clause 4. 
If he wants to say anything let him say now. What is the good of 
saying: “You did not give me any opportunity then” ? All that is not 
relevant. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh: Sir, whatever your ruling it is 
acceptable. But I am not saying anything unreasonable. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : What is the good of wasting time over 
that matter ? 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : That is not the thing. All the Members 
here have the right to speak, and the subject in discussion here is 
such that it should not have been brought up at all. To me indeed 
any punishment given to the Government, who have brought this 
measure here, and their supporters in this regard would be reasonable. 
Sir, you Probably do not know that hundreds of persons are daily 
arrested here outside and released ten or twenty miles away. It is 
said to be a secular State. Does a secular State give liberty to do 
all sorts of unreasonable things under the cover of secularism ? This 
Parliament is meant to protect the rights of the people and you are 
its presiding officer. These things must come to your knowledge and 
you should give due consideration to them. What is it after all that 
police has been posted all round and none can pass that way ? This 
is very bad and absolutely unjustifiable. 

This Bill abrogates all the previous texts of the Hindu Law and all 
rules and interpretations given in respect of them. I am not talking 
of customs. (I am simply speaking of text). Sir, you are a scholar 
and are very well aware that the Vedas of our country came to be 
revealed at the beginning of the world and the establishment of the 
social organisation. The rules of conduct and duties of men in our 
country are determined by the Vedas. Today we have Pandit Nehru’s 
administration whose representative. Dr. Ambedkar wants to abrogate 
with a single stroke all those rules which have existed since the 
beginning of the world. I would say that all the Hon. Members should 
oppose such a measure. Firstly, the Hindu Code Bill should not pass 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1264 


1264 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

at all. But if it has to pass, at least this portion of it, clause 4, must 
not pass in any case. You know, Sir, and Dr. Ambedkar also knows very 
well, that Buddhism was preached by Lord Buddha to undo the hold 
of the Vedas. But the Vedic religion did not perish. Hardly a few years 
have passed since the advent of Pandit Nehru’s rule and Dr. Ambedkar’s 
coming into office and the Vedic principles are sought to be repudiated. 
Do they not think that such laws should not be passed ? Nobody in the 
country would accept this law. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Babu Ramnarayan Singh is perfectly 
right. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : How could they dare to say that things 
that have been in existence since times immemorial, since the beginning 
of the earth and the creation of the Sun and the Moon should now no 
more be followed ? Wherefrom did they get this right ? Buddhism was 
preached to overthrow the Vedic religion. Other religions including 
Islam also came. All came and fell, but Vedic religion is still there and 
would remain as such. No one can destroy it and it is an improper and 
absolutely misguided effort that is being made to efface it. It gives me 
pain that such things are brought in our Parliament. As our friend 
Thakur Das Bhargava just said religion and the rules of good conduct 
were determined by the Veda and the Smriti: 

Veda, Smriti, sadacharah 

Atmanstushtireva cha, 

Etachchaturvidhah prahus- 

Sakshaddharmasya Lakshanam. 

The definition of Religion is four-fold ; Veda, Smriti, Sadacharah (good 
conduct) and Atmatushti (self-satisfaction). 

Rules of good conduct were thus fixed in accordance with the Vedas. 
But simply that was not enough. It was also to be seen that what the 
Vedas prescribe, what they command, should also be there in the shastras, 
Vedas set down the path of religion and the Shastras supplemented them. 
But that was not the end all. The rules incorporated in the Vedas and 
supported by Shastras should be observed in the conduct, manners and 
actions of the good people. That is what was meant by the rules of good 
conduct. But nobody was bound as to their observance simply for the 
reason that they were laid down by the Vedas and Dharma Shastras 
and also followed by good people. In the last, he was to see how far 
his conscience, his knowledge of good and bad, agreed with them. After 
consideration of all these factors, his duty was to be finally determined. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1265 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1265 

Not to speak of the Vedas , the Shastras and good conduct; 

not even was the conscience spared ; the Hon. Minister and 
this Government mean that our conscience be left out and 
this Bill be passed : and work be done according to it. Just think, what 
an injustice it means. Need I submit more, you just look up the meaning 
of the word ‘Law’ in the dictionary. What does it mean, after all ? You 
can look up the word in the dictionary, and some of you must have seen 
it already. Dr. Ambedkar is a scholar no doubt; he must have looked it 
up in the dictionary. 

Dr. Ambedkar: No; I don’t look it up. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : But he puts his scholarships aside and is 
behaving in a strange way. What is Law after all ? Law today means a 
supremacy, or a predominant society making a regulation with the help 
of a military or police and thrusting it on the society as a whole. Sir, 
Law does not mean this. Law, according to the lexicon, means : — “Law 
is nothing but the will of the people expressed in terms of Law” — which, 
in other words, means — whatsoever is the will of the society, is placed 
in the form of a law and is called a law. These people have now gained 
supremacy : Police and military are at their command, and with the 
help of police and military and in the name and with the help of party 
discipline, they may get anything passed. 

Shrimati Dixit (Madhya Pradesh): There is no party discipline. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : There is party discipline and you will 
pass it. 

Shrimati Dixit: No ; it is not so. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh: Well, what will come out of ‘yes’ and 
‘no’ ? I know the position. 

Sir, I mean to say that a lot of injustice is caused by such a law. It 
is not in the interests of this country, nor do the people of this country 
want it, and, therefore, this should not be passed as law. As I told you 
a number of revolutions took place, great religious revolutions, but the 
fundamental of the Vedas were not changed. With one stroke of pen 
Dr. Ambedkar now wants the vedas an offence, and this Bill should, in no 
case, be passed. As there are different texts and rules, the interpretations 
follow them. A number of sages (Rishis) were born in our land. Shri 
Thakur Das made a mention of them. It has been said : 

Vedah vibhinnah Smritiyo vibhinnah, 

Naiko muniryasaya vachah Pramanam, 

Dharmasya tatvam nihitam guhyam, 

Mahajano, Yena gatah Sa Pantha.” 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1266 


1266 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Vedas differ and smritis also differ. There is no sage whose word 
can be taken as final. The secret of Dharma is very deep, follow the 
path traversed by the great. 

Which means — One Veda gives one dictum, while the other shows a 
difference of opinion. In Vedas there are certain things where people 
can have doubts. Likewise, there are smritis and Dharmashastras. 
All of them are of the same opinion, it cannot be said so. Some 
Dharmashastra gives one thing, while the other gives something 
else. There also is difference of opinion — “Naiko Muniyarasya Vachah 
Pramanam” — “There is not a single sage whose word can be taken as 
final” ; No such sage has born, whose dictum could be authoritative 
and, hence, to be taken as complete truth, and the rest to be discarded. 
Not even so. But after this those of us who make of a mention of 
Manu Maharaj — some amongst them say likewise, that Dr. Ambedkar 
is Manu of the day 

Dr. Ambedkar : I have not accepted that title. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : do not accept, please. They say it 
wrongly, as you, in fact, do not deserve it: this is not a thing to be 
accepted. Those who confer this title upon you do it by way of flattery. 
It you are called ‘Manu’, all of us, too, would like to be called so ; 
why you alone. 

And whatever were the dictates of Manu, whatever were his 
orders, were automatically followed by everybody. They were not 
propagated at the point of sword. Whenever he were to sit to make 
a law no police and military were kept on guard. I go to the extent 
and say that we should feel ashamed that when such a subject is 
being discussed we are encircled and guraded by police and military 
lest somebody should come and interrupt us. Furthermore, it has 
been said :”Dharamsya Tatvam nihitam guhayam” — The secret of 
Dharma is very deep it is hidden in the caves. Sir, everybody does 
know that these people must have thought at times that the subject 
of Dharma was so difficult that it could not be understood. Its secret, 
which is said to be lying in some cave, is very difficult to find out. 
How beautifully has, therefore, been said : “Mahajano yena gatah sa 
panthah” — “That, indeed, is the path which was followed by great 
men.” In such circumstances, when Vedas say something, Shastras 
uphold something else, conduct rules ordain something else and it 
may become difficult to make a right choice then what should be 
done ? It is, therefore, said : “ Mahajano yena gatah Sa panthah” 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1267 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1267 

— i.e., whatever is done by the great should be followed. Those, who 
are called great in our country today, are doing and out to do such 
things as are not acceptable to anybody even today. Who will accept 
them in the days to come ? I beg to submit that this subject should be 
considered in a definite light, and in such a way that everybody may 
get an opportunity to think and have his say. 

Sir, about usages and customs they say that custom should not exist. 
These people are prepared to do away with customs and will surely 
do away with them. They should know that the Scriptures, Vedas, 
Puranas were not introduced at the point of the sword or by any kind 
of coercion. Those were such regulations as were be acceptable to any 
body when formulated. Some give the name ‘customs’ ‘family-customs’ 
some name it as ‘family conduct’ while others call them ‘customs and 
traditions. 

At a certain place in Ramayana it is said: 

“ Raghukul riti sada chali ayi, 

Pran jahin par vachan na jayi.” 

(Raghu Dynasty has its ever-present custom. Life it will give, but 
not discard the word.) 

It was a trait of the Raghu Family, yes — a tradition, a custom : Life 
should not be cared for, it should even be sacrificed, but the words given 
by them should in no case, go futile. What need I say today ? Cheers 
to the talent of Dr. Ambedkar or the talent of this Government which 
tells us not to talk of customs and to do away with truth and customs. 
They say, all the customs and traditions should be done away with. 
This is just a thing to be understood as to how important the customs 
were “Raghukul riti sada chali Ayi, Pran Jahin par Vachan Na Jayi” 
Just look to it that the man who seeks to become our Manu today, 
says that there should not be any custom nor traditions whatsoever; 
we should do away with all of them. 

Shrimati Dixit: But what is happening today ? 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : If your will were to carry the day, the 
words could happen. Now comes to question of divorce. In our country, 
there are some five or six such communities which we know are not 
more than two to four crores in number. For them they are making 
this laws so that the right of divorce for them may be secured. In 
the rest 90 per cent of the society, we know that divorce is a thing 
of daily routine. And, sir, how is this divorce given ? Two, four or 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1268 


1268 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

five of them sit together, both the contending parties come and they 
break some stalk of grass ; and their mutual realtions are broken — 
this completed the “divorce”. Not a panny as to be incurred on this, 
nor any botheration. Our Hon. Dr. Ambedkar is a well-wisher of 
the Untouchables and they too should know that such well-wishers 
should be shunned. Now all of them will have to go to the district 
judge for divorce, what a lot of expenditure arid botheration will this 
procedure mean ? Then alone will divorce be granted. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad (West Bengal): A decent work for 

lawyer ! 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh: Lawyers giving maintenance to 
lawyers ! 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : The Panchayat is being 
empowered to register the divorce. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : Well, even if it is in the hands of the 
Panch, it is right to some extent, but that too will be a Government 
Post. I assert that the Bill be scheduled. Let this law go to hell 
and then you will see how easily the entire system work. We have 
panchayats and panchas; and in our country customs and usages 
are pliable they will continue to hold good and people would accept 
them automatically. If any law is formulated or any decision taken, 
it should be so clear and precise as may be amiably accepted by 
people, and they may not think of going against it. But the law that 
is being passed here, is such that people in our country will take 
pride in breaking it, and will not act upon it. This is nothing but 
a whim of those who today have gained power. They are obstinacy- 
ridden and say that the Bill must be passed somehow. What the 
country thinks, and what she needs, the Government never worry 
about it. What is being spent for it here, and what, after all, is 
its necessity, nobody cares for it: the Government go on spending 
money lavishly and thus ruin the country ; go on passing baseless 
and futile laws against the will of the public. I insist upon our Rajaji 
and Dr. Ambedkar that the Bill be withdrawn : the country does 
not want it, and the good of the country, good of us all, lies in its 
being withdrawn. This simply astonishes me that such an injustice 
is being here where personages like Rajaji are present. There can 
be nothing more shameful and sorrowful than this. 

Sir, I do not want to take more time but I want to request you 
that the subject is so serious that it needs a proper debate ; and if 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 1269 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1269 

any hon. Member wants to speak on it, he should be permitted to 
do so. This Bill has created a stir in the entire country as also in 
the City, and hold that the Bill should not be proceeded with. The 
Government should withdraw it, and if it is not withdrawn, but 
proceeded with instead discussion in a proper way be conducted 
and the hon. Members be not stopped from speaking on it. I would 
request all the hon. Members to understand all the pros and cons 
and pass it, then. They may also bear in mind that the good of 
the country and the society be not impaired in any way by this 
self-willed piece of legislation, and I again submit with respect to 
all the hon. Members, that this clause at least be omitted. 

Shri Sarwate (Madhya Bharat): I rise to oppose the amendment 
of Dr. Ambedkar because I consider part (b) of the amendment as 
unnecessary and superfluous while part (a) is quite undesirable. 

Dr. Ambedkar : You may abuse me as much as possible, provided 
you do not take much time. I am concerned more with the time 
than with the abuse. 

* Shri Sarwate: Sir, I am not abusing him. I am only opposing 
his amendment. If not interrupted, I shall take very little time. 

I submit that by virtue of article 254 of the Constitution, all 
laws made by the State which are repugnant to or are inconsistent 
with the laws made by Parliament stand ipso facto, to that extent, 
inoperative. The other laws which may possibly be referred to in 
this connection are laws made before this code by the Centre. In 
their case the later law will precede the previous law. Therefore, 
in both the cases, that is, in the case of laws made by the Centre, 
they would, to that extent, to which they are inconsistent to 
the code be ipso facto inoperative. Therefore, I say part (b) is 
unnecessary and superfluous. As regards part (a), the effect of this 
amendment would be that all customs and all texts or rules or 
interpretation of Hindu law and customs would be made inoperative, 
subject to the saving clause at the beginning, namely, all such 
customs as would be saved by being included in any of the later 
provisions. My submission is that this is entirely undesirable. 
The Hindu religion has been living and progresssing. It has been 
said that it is dying and decadent. It has been compared to the 
shameful life of a coward who flies away from the field of battle. 
I would only submit that it is often ignored that one who fled 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 22nd September 1951, pp. 3103-7. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1270 


1270 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

from the battle field may return only to vanquish those who 
erstwhile were the victors. It must be remembered that the Hinuds 
have reppelled those who were for a time, and only for a temporary 
time, able to overcome them. In the last century the Marathas in 
Maharashtra from where Dr. Ambedkar himself comes, and then the 
Sikhs in the north were successful in achieving their independence 
and establishing their kingdoms. But I need not go into past history 
either ancient or modern. In our own day and before our own eyes, 
we have seen this accomplished. Have we forgotten that the present 
Parliament of which Dr. Ambedkar is an illustrious Member is the 
result of 

Dr. Ambedkar: I have no right to be here. I have sneaked in. 

Shri Sarwate : I wish he makes no confession of that nature. 

This very Parliament is an illustration that the Hindus repelled 
the foreigners who had dominated over them temporarily. And what 
was the element or factor which gave this like or this rejuvenating 
characteristic to the Hindu religion ? In my opinion, it is custom 
and by custom I mean such custom as is defined and accepted by 
this House in clause 3 — custom, which is a rule that is certain and 
not unreasonable or opposed to public policy. It is said that custom 
might be of a bad nature and therefore it requires to be mentioned 
here. But to say so is contradiction in terms : just as contradictory 
as today For custom is defined here as that which is not 

opposed to public policy. Therefore, such customs as are opposed to 
public policy or morality, they will stand, ipso facto repealed. Those 
customs alone will be saved as would be good customs. 

The House will realise that the sources of Hindu law have been 
described as: 

SjfrT FijfrT: J-MMK Puddlrm: I 

First of all the Srutis and Smritis lay down the fundamental 
common background. And then and TTFT ftPFT provide for variety, 

that is to say the element which would suit the various regions of 
the country. It has to be borne in mind that India is a continent in 
extent and its population is equal almost to the population of the 
U.S.S.R. in the East and to the U.S.A. in the West put together. 
So unless there is variety of the law, the law would be absolutely 
oppressive and it would be difficult to make it suit the various 
requirements of the different regions. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1271 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1271 

Now I would refer to another text of Hindu Law — I mean that law 
as it prevails at present. Yajnavalkya says : 

dPWH ^ 3HMIJJ I rT^cf MPC-UrT ^ II 

That is to say, whatever customs, practices or family usages prevail 
in the country shall be preserved intact. And the Vyavastha or rule in 
this connection is stated thus : 

ifrri MJn|j| ppttt MciTiujHrtddi i tr in? fm rp^.- 3 hmkh> xr ; u 

They are not liable to censure, whose predecessors used to practise 
these usages. In modern language, it means that the customs are 
ancient and from time immemorial. And others which are not so would 
not be observed. 

So with this Vyavastha, the Hindu religion was vitalising itself and 
adopting itself to different regions. 

Now, I shall take a small illustration and show that if we entirely 
do away with customs by accepting this amendment what would be 
its effect. There are many reasons why the amendment should not 
be so accepted. First of all, I trust even the learned Law Minister 
is not conversant with all the good usages that are prevalent in this 
country from Cape Comorin in the south to the Himalayas in the 
north. Neither are the Members conversant with all of them. And 
even if they are, they would not be in a position either to convince the 
learned Doctor or to convince the other Members of the House of the 
utility or significance of those usages and of the importance in which 
those usages are held in particular parts of the country. Therefore, I 
tried in an amendment of mine, which was for a technical reason not 
accepted or not put forward, to provide a simpler device by which the 
local Legislature may be able to supplement this law. That, however, 
has gone. Therefore, I submit that because of ignorance of all the good 
usages in the country we should not say “save as otherwise provided 

in the provisions ”. The effect of this saving clause will be nil 

and part (a) of the amendment will do away with all good customs, 
whether they are repugnant or not to the law. 

According to part (b) only those laws which are inconsistent with the 
present law are only repealed, whereas in the case of customs, whether 
repugnant or otherwise, they have all been abrogated. This is a very 
wide provision which should be lost if it is omitted altogether. A custom 
is governed by all the requisite qualifications mentioned in clause 3, 
which the house has already passed and laws would be governed by 
article 254 of the Constitution. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1272 


1272 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I shall now take one more instance. Marriage is after all a social 
institution, meant to satisfy a social need. If social circumstances 
vary to a great extent in various regions of the country, several 
provisions would have to be made in the law which is to be enacted. 
In the present Hindu Law this is achieved in two ways. There are 
firstly various schools of Hindu Law. There was the law of Dayabhaga 
and Mitakshara. The common background is the Yajanavalkya’s 
and Manu’s smritis. The variety was given by Dayabhaga and 
Mitakshara. Further there were in fbcTTSBT various schools which 
governed different parts. There was the Mithila school, the Banaras 
school, the Madras school and the Maharashtra school. This was 
one of the ways in which variety was provided in Hindu society, 
which I maintain will for that reason never die. Secondly, there 
was the achar and on account of this the Hindu Law and religion 
have been progressive and satisfying the needs of all, which were 
this vitalising factor. It is the variety which, added to the common 
background, has kept the religion alive throughout the century. 
Invaders have come and gone, but Hinduism is still progressing. 

I shall now take up the question of monogamy. Irrespective of 
what the law givers lay down, society would adopt monogamy or 
other systems of marriage according to its needs. Good law givers 
therefore ought to provide for this varying need. One of the factors 
which govern the form of institution of marriage is the ratio between 
the males and females. If there is an equal ratio between the sexes 
there will be monogamy and society is bound to be happy. But if 
there is very great disparity between the sexes then society will 
have to adjust form of marriage accordingly. If females exceed 
the number of males then bigamy or polygamy would have to be 
allowed. Otherwise the result would be either adultery or increase 
in illegitimate children. 

Shri Naziurddin Ahmad: Adultery is permitted by this Bill. 

Shri Sarwate : I will not take notice of it. There was a common 
phenomenon which had been observed during the war. When in U.K. 
the adult male population went to the war fronts there remained 
behind in the country an excessive number of women and the result 
was a great increase in the number of illegitimate children, which has 
now become a very difficult qustion for solution. This phenomenon 
has occured in other countries also. So also if the number of men is 
much more than the number of women then poliandry would come 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 1273 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1273 

in, in one form or another. Even in that case the same result would 
follow, I am in favour of monogamy, both because it is a law of nature 
and society has enjoined it and it is in accordance with modern trends. 
In that respect fortunately in India the ratio between the sexes is equal 
but even here there are certain other factors which have to be taken 
into consideration. I have some figures about the ratio in the different 
provinces. These figures show that the ratio in Madras and Bombay is 
equal. 

Dr. Ambedkar: You are pleading for polygamy ? 

Shri Sarwate : Let me proceed. In Bengal and some other provinces 
the males are preponderating and the females are less. So if you provide 
only one form of marriage for all these provinces it may not do. 

Shri Brajeshwar Prasad (Bihar): Has my hon. friend studied the 
ratio between the different age groups — the males between the ages of 
16 and 35 and the proportion of females between the ages of 16 and 
35 ? That will throw light on the question whether there should be 
monogamy or polygamy. 

Dr. Ambedkar: He wants you to study the proportion of the different 
age groups among the sexes. But why do you not leave the argument 
to younger people ? 

Shri Sarwate : Every body has to do his work. Dr. Ambedkar has to 
do his work and I am doing mine. 

To proceed with my argument, it is irrelevent or unnecessary for 
developing my argument to show what the proportion of the males to 
the females in the different age groups is. I want here to show that in 
different tracts different conditions prevail and would have to be provided 
for as has been done in the prevailing Hindu Law through the different 
schools and through the achar. This is a case where it is absolutely 
necessary that variety must be provided for and it can be done only 
by allowing customs, customs which are ancient and are governed by 
public morality. 

I conclude with this observation, that this amendment is entirely 
unnecessary. Sub-clause (a) is undesirable and sub-clause (b) is 
unnecessary. Therefore, this clause should be entirely dropped and the 
amendment disallowed. 

*Dr. C. D. Pande (Uttar Pradesh): I rise to speak in favour of 
omitting the clause which seeks to abrogate the validity of customary 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 22nd September 1951, pp. 3107-12. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1274 


1274 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

law. I think this clause enlarges the scope of the Hindu Code. Let 
me go briefly into the genesis of the Hindu Code Bill. What was the 
necessity of this Bil ? If you know the background you will know 
how absurd it is to maintain this clause in this Code. The genesis of 
the Hindu Code Bill is that there was a constant demand, and there 
was a feeling in the minds of the leaders of the Hindu society, that 
there must be a law to be in conformity with the civilised concept of 
human society. There are only two things for which a case has been 
made out conclusively and we stand for them : one is acceptance of 
monogamy, imperatively and without exception: the other thing is 
that those who seek divorce in certain cases of hardship should be 
able to get it, that there should be no difficulty in that process of 
separation, annulment or divorce. These are the only two things for 
which a case has been made out and I do not see if any similar case 
has been made out for the abrogation of the validity of customary 
law. Have you ever heard of a single representaton or of a single 
meeting of the people who are governed by customary law, that this 
law should be changed, that it should be brought in conformity with 
the strict law of Manu ? Or, have you heard that they are tired 
of their customary law and they want to come within the orbit of 
Manu’s law ? No : I have not heard of one single reprsentation or of 
one single meeting, either in the Press or on the platform, demanding 
that. There has been a constant demand for improvement in the law 
as far as monogamy goes, and also as far as divorce goes. People say 
there is a slur on our name in foreign countries. Well, that may be 
so; for that we have now accepted the prinicple of monogamy and 
of divorce. But I do not like that in the garb of making changes in 
the Hindu law you should introduce things which are absolutely 
detrimental to the interest of more than 80 per cent of the people of 
this land. If you analyse the population of this country, how many 
people, will you find, governed by Manu’s law ? Only a handful of 
Brahmans, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas. But even they are governed 
by local laws as well and local laws have got an overriding position 
over Hindu law. Hindu law was originally not a textual law but a 
customary law and it was codified by Manu, Yajnavalkya and others 
in course of time. 

Difficulty was experienced by the Legislature of India in the course 
of the last 100 years in these matters, and they made certain laws 
about specific drawbacks which were thus removed. Now the demand 
has arisen for change with respect to monogamy and divorce. We 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1275 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1275 

concede it, but how do you presume that there is a desire for change 
so far as customary law is concerned ? What is customary law ? It is a 
natural law, it is a dynamic law, it is a growing law, it has got the force 
of the needs of the time ; if you do not allow that growth, that dynamic 
character in the society you will become rigid, you will be doing harm 
to the Hindu society just as Manu’s law has done harm, according to 
you in the course of the last 3,000 years. Do you want that this should 
be perpetrated in the vast sections of the society which is not governed 
by that law ? This House stands for the principles of monogamy and 
divorce. Now in the progressive age you want to create hardships in 
the matter of those very things in respect of which you want to give 
facilities ? it is absolutely inconceivable to me that you desire to do so. 
It will be a retrograde step. 

There is another reason for customary law being maintained. It will 
be impossible for the State to maintain adequates number of judicial 
officers and magistrate to deal with cases of divorce or judicial 
separation. (An hon. Member: Government have enough money.) 
They do not have enough money even to maintain magistrates to try 
ordinary cases, which are pending for several months together. You 
have no idea as to how many more magistrates will be needed. Even 
if you have money and you are bent upon doing it, do you know the 
hardship involved ? The cost may be ignored, but the hardship cannot be 
ignored, because in this country unfortunately whenever a citizen comes 
into contact with Government machinery he is subjected to vexations 
at every step. I myself have been a functionary of the Government and 
I have a clear idea of these things. I had some influence, but if I were 
an ordinary non-official and I went to a court of law, I know how much 
attention I would receive. An ordinary citizen finds it difficult even to 
get a ration card. Do you think it will be easy to get a divorce certificate 
in a court of law for a person who is ignorant and poor ? 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava (Ajmer): Courts will be more efficient 
hereafter. 

Dr. C. D. Pande : Things should be accepted as they are. You cannot 
expect to improve things all of a sudden. There is no justification for 
creating hardships. Why do you want to abrogate the customary law ? 
Have you received any representation for the abrogation of customary 
law ? Why do you insist on it ? Why do you insist on creating difficulties ? 

Shri A. C. Shukla (Madhya Pradesh) : Because it is against public 
morality. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 1276 

1276 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dr. C. D. Pander Let not morality be governed by law ? If you 
have any illusion that you can govern people’s morality by law, you 
are mistaken. 

Shri Lakshmanan (Tranvancore- Cochin): He is not addressing the 
Chair. He is addressing individual Members as ‘you’. 

Dr. C. D. Pande : I am sorry. It is a manner of address to say ‘you’. 
‘You’ does not mean an individual Member. It means the Legislators 
here. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: No interruptions please. 

Dr. C. D. Pande: I do not mind the interruptions, because the 
case that I am putting before you is sustained by the will of the 
people outside. I know the people. I know their difficulties. I know 
the prevalence of the customs. The difficulties that will be created will 
be enormous. You have not got the machinery to deal with the cases. 
The cases may be in far off places where there will be no Government 
machinery. People manage their affairs in an automatic manner. 
There is an automatic adjustment in social affairs. That automatic 
adjustment of the society will be disturbed. You wish to take upon 
yourself a responsibility for which you are not prepared. Moreover it 
is uncalled for. There is no justification for it. No case has been made 
out for the abrogation of customary law. A case has been made out 
for making divorce easier, not for restricting the scope of divorce. Why 
do you want to enact legislation which is not in consonance with the 
likings of the people and which goes against the very spirit of this 
Code ? This Code seeks to confer divorce and you want to restrict 
divorce. If this contention has any validity, then I submit the Law 
Minister will consider the matter carefully and sympathetically. 

*Shri Oraon : ( English translation of the Hindi speech ) Sir, I 
had not to speak much about this Hindu Code Bill; but we are now 
confronted with a situation which compels me to speak something. I 
mean to say that Scheduled Tribes and Abroiginals are neither Hindu 
nor Muslim nor Christian. They are without any religion. First they 
were not included in this Bill nor did they want themselves to be 
dragged into it. But now I find that we too are being dragged into 
this Bill. I want to say that the divorces which take place amidst our 
Community, perhaps do not take place in any part of the world. We 
know that not less than 80 or 85 per cent divorces take place before 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 22nd September 1951, pp. 3112-13. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 1277 

DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1277 

any child is born as a result of the marriage. If some action is to be 
taken there or a divorce is to take place, we shall be handicapped 
in getting the case recorded with a Panch. It is said that the case 
will have to be recorded in our own Panchayats. The Mukhia of that 
place will go to the court and apply. If either of the two — man or 
woman, who come for divorce do not agree to his decision, the case 
will proceed further and move to the court. We know how many 
divorces take place. Not even in 18 months will the cases registered 
in only twelve months be decided. Dragging us into the Hindu Code 
Bill, therefore, is not only injustice but our virtual death. I would 
request the learned doctor, therefore, to exclude us from it. 

Next, whatever we see in the Hindu Code Bill, is both good and 
bad. May be, people living in the cities may not know this, but we 
are villagers and come across people of all types. All of them are 
against it. In this state of affairs we see that on the part of the 
members of the Parliament, the representatives of people as they 
are, this will not be a right course of action nor will it be right 
on the part of the Government to pass this Bill. It is, therefore, I 
must say that this Bill should not be passed unless new elections 
are held. 

*Shri Jangde : ( English translation of the Hindi speech ). Sir, 
I have been listening to the speeches of the Hon. Members for the 
last four or five days. From their speeches it appears to me that 
clauses are not being considered, but that general discussion has 
started. 

I wish to recount the objections raised by the hon. Members 
against this Marriage and Divorce Bill and I consider it my duty 
to reply to them. 

Just now Shri C. D. Pande said that a loose custom of marriage 
and divorce prevalent amog 90 per cent of the people should be 
left intact. He also asked why should the Dwij communities, among 
which this divorce custom does not obtain, be compelled to adopt it. 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava: He did not say this. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : This was not said. Why are you 
unjust to him? 

Shri Jangde : He said that this matrimonial code, which is going 
to be passed, would greatly lengthen the procedure of marriage etc. 
and would create many difficulties for the village people. 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 22nd September 1951, pp. 3117-20. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1278 


1278 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh: He came only to give a sermon to 
us. He did not speak on any clause in particular. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh: You deserve it. 

Shri Jangde: I have been doing work of social reform among 
these 90 per cent of the people and I know them thoroughly. I know 
their marriage and divorce customs very well. The people who are 
speaking on their behalf do not know them. They speak only to place 
obstructions in the progress of this Bill. It has been said that easy 
divorce is a very good thing. I want to tell you sir, that the custom 
of divorce among the Shudras has become so old and useless that 
it is being highly misused. Today the honour of our mothers and 
sisters is at stake on account of this. They are sold in Calcutta and 
Bombay and they embrace other faiths. Today among the Shudras 
a woman does not enjoy even as much respect as a cow does. A cow 
is sold only once, but women are sold many times. The custom now 
prevailing among them has become the custom of the high-handed 
and is no longer the custom of the poor. You say that if this custom 
is abolished, people will have to incur much expenditure in the Law 
Court, but I cannot help praising the wisdom of Dr. Ambedkar who 
has suggested the remedy that the decisions of the Panch of the caste 
shall not be binding until the sanction of the Government is obtained. 
Today what we do is to marry, perform the custom of Saptapadi, 
and to sell her (the wife) after two or three days. People become 
ready to sell and divorce her. In this case, what is the meaning of 
sacramental marriage and Saptapadi ? The old customs have become 
rotten. You want to maintain them. You want to keep them in the 
name of Hindu religion. But I want to tell you that 90 per cent, 
people of Hindu society are becoming opposed to them. Women are 
not shown any respect. They are labouring under difficulties. You 
say that we regard them as Devis and Saubhagya Lakshmi, but this 
is all wrongly put by you. 

Just now some hon. Members said that they did not want divorce 
for the Dwijas and why should they be compelled to adopt it. This is 
the opinion of many of the hon. Members. You want to place the lion 
and the cow in the same category. Should the hunter and his prey 
be placed together ? Do you want to unite the East and the West ? 
They can never meet. On the one hand you say that there should 
be no divorce among the Dwijas, on the other, you say that loose 
divorce should be maintained among the Shudras. This anomoly is 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1279 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1279 

leading to a fall in our moral and human standards. The Hindu Code 
has been drafted to reomve this extreme kind of discrimination and to 
bring the Dwijas and Shudras from Cape Comorin right upto Kashmir 
together. You want to spread the awakening among the Hindus. I 
say that the Hindu Code Bill would be a great help in this direction. 
You do not want to show the same sense of moral values which has 
been shown by Dr. Ambedkar in drafting this Bill. In this connection 
I wish to say that if there can be any means of bringing the Dwijas 
and the Shudras together, it can only be the Hindu Code Bill. You 
say that it should be applied only to those who want it, and those 
who do not want it should not be compelled to adopt it and none 
should be forced to adopt monogamy and divorce. In my opinion 
propaganda has been done in the wrong manner is this connection. 
Government have no money and they do not want to do propaganda 
in this respect. Not the supporters, but the opponents of the Hindu 
Code are doing forceful propaganda. Once I heard that Karpatriji 
said in a speech that it could even make marriage between father 
and daughter possible. Similarly other false propaganda is being 
done. It is said that it would lead to marriages between brothers 
and sisters and the Hindu religion is going to pieces. I say that 
the diseases which have crept into Hindu religion are being sought 
to be removed by treatment. This is the aim of the Hindu Code. 
Such a propaganda is being done in this connection. You say that 
you do not want divorce, but on the other hand, you want that it 
should be introduced for us. Among the Dwijas a married woman 
who becomes a widow, cannot be re-married in any case but men 
can marry a hundred times if they like. This is no justice. Just as 
Rama married once 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: You leave Rama aside. 

Shri Bhatt: He should be allowed. 

Shri Jangde : I was speaking of the evil custom prevailing among 
the Shudras. We want to change it. Every person can marry five or 
six women. In no home are women married according to Saptapadi 
are found. They go away with the high-handed persons. By changing 
their women repeatedly they incur much expenditure. More than half 
of their property is spent in marrying these women. Is it justice that 
a woman married to a man should go to another ? This Bill in which 
you see the end of the Hindu religion has been introduced to remove 
these evils. Therefore, without taking more time I would like to submit 
that if you want to see the renaissance of the Hindu religion, if you 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 1280 

1280 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

want to maintain it and bring the Dwijas and the Shudras together, 
the amendment in respect of Marriage and Divorce clauses of the 
Hindu Code Bill should be accepted. 

*Shri T. N. Singh : ( English translation of the Hindi speech ). 
Sir, I am delibratley speaking in Hindi, because some of the hon. 
Members and particularly shri Oraon, by speaking on the Hindu 
Code Bill in Hindi, have in a way asked us to do the same. We 
have one thing specially in mind while discussing this particular 
clause 4. Dr. Ambedkar has certainly tried to take a place in the 
galaxy of Manu. Parasher and Yajnavalkya by following in their 
footsteps, but I believe that it is an unjustified effort on his part 
because our traditions have gradually evolved according to the 
dictates of time and circumstances. They are formed on the basis 
of collective wisdom and experience. Therefore, the wisdom of any 
particular individual cannot affect them. What I mean to say is 
that we cannot violate our traditions so simply and so easily. We 
perhaps do not even know all of these traditions. I would challenge 
Dr. Ambedkar, our Minister of Law, to state how many traditions 
of ours, which he wants to destroy completely through this Hindu 
Code, are there in this vast country of ours, in the Bharatvarsh. 
How far is it proper for him to say that these traditions which 
he perhaps does not know of should be completely destroyed ? 
Therefore, you can make efforts to follow Parashar or Yajnavalkya 
or any other lawgiver ( Smritikar ) but, for god’s sake, do not make 
this wanton assault on these traditions. 

Sir, I would like to tell you that a good many traditions are being 
followed by innumerable people in every corner of our country. They 
are perhaps being followed on a higher level of morality that what 
was obtained by Manu, Parashar or any other Smritikar. Can anybody 
today say that in that section of our country to which our Shri Theble 
Oraon has the Honour of belonging, many things, many traditions, 
many laws are not such as are highly superior to our laws ? In my 
view this divorce (perhaps there is no one word of it in Hindi). (An 
hon. Member: Vivah-Vichheda.) You may say Vivah vichheda, but it 
is not one word anyway, the rules in force there in this regard are 
far superior to the rules in our Code or rules found anywhere, in 
England, in America or elsewhere. In our opinion it is not proper to 
curtail them or to boast that this Code or this measure is better and 
should replace them. Therefore I would appeal to our Government, 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 22nd September 1951, pp. 3126-28. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1281 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1281 

to our Hon. Minister of Law that it is improper for us, being ignorant 
of the traditions, to deal with all these traditions in this manner. 
Secondly, it is not wise to destroy completely these traditions and 
specially when they do not go against any rule or Bill. I have heard 
that in some cases in some parts, these customs and traditions are 
being given their due place. But no amendments have come before us 
in regard to them. 

An Hon. Member : Amendments regarding marriage have come. 

Shri T. N. Singh : But amendments regarding other things have not 
come, perhaps they are about to come. I welcome them. But at the same 
time I would submit that it is not correct to make laws for them in a 
sweepig manner with a view to eradicate them. That is why I oppose 
this measure particularly. If you were to read this clause, it will be 
found that the words ‘any other laws in force’ have been added to the 
clause now framed i.e. any other law or Act which is inconsistent with 
it would also be repealed and would not be applicable. In that case, 
would it not be proper if you also said in regard to these traditions 
that the inconsistent things would not be applied and any coustom or 
tradition going against any of its principles or basic aims would not be 
applicable. If so, it would have been understandable. But to say that 
no tradition would apply is not fair and I believe that it is essential to 
change or amend it carefully. I do agree that many of our traditions 
are inconsistent and are perhaps not accroding to the times. According 
to some of the current traditions, an aged man of 60 or 70 can also 
marry. But it is regretted that this is not incongruous with the Hindu 
Code. What I mean to say is that if you have to axe any tradition, 
axe such traditions. 

Shri A. C. Shukla: Those regarding dowry. 

Shri T. N. Singh: Yes, there are many others, like widow remarriage 
etc. You made scores of laws regarding them and did many things, but 
did we succeed through them ? That is why I say that every tradition 
should be thoroughly studied. I am opposed to removing all of them. I 
do not mean that none of our traditions is wrong. 

Shri A. C. Shukla : May I ask a question ? How will you determine 
that a particular tradition is good or bad ? If 75 per cent, people of a 
community want a custom to be retained, should their view be accepted, 
and should the customary law, as stated by Shri Jangde, be reformed ? 
Everybody wants reform of the bad customs. Therefore, let us know 
how it should be determined. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 1282 

1282 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri T. N. Singh: The question put by Shri Shukla is very 
simple. It is not you or I who reform the traditions. It is done by 
the whole society, the whole community, according to the dictates of 
the time and it can never be said that all traditions have remained 
unchanged. All of them have undergone changes. But I say that 
when we apply our individual judgment as against our collective 
wisdom, it becomes our duty to study them fully. That is all I have 
to say. I do not say that no customs should be changed, but we 
should change them with our collective wisdom. We have the right 
to do so in this manner, but we should not do it through legislation. 
This is what I want to say. 

Shri A. C. Shukla: How ? 

Shri T. N. Singh : Many of the traditions which you regard as bad 
get changed by the pressure of public opinion. Many others change 
according to the dictates of time. It is said that at one time when 
a child was bom in sparta, it was thrown away. If it could survive 
one day and one night, it was brought back and given a lease of 
life. This is correct. There was a special necessity for that tradition 
at that time. These traditions change with the times as the needs 
of society change. 

Dr. Ambedkar: You are arguing a bad case. 

Shri T. N. Singh: I do not understand this. When I believe that 
you are making a vain effort, you might think that I am supporting 
a bad case. The thing is that you do not have full knowledge of our 
traditions. Only after studying them completely you might change 
them and those traditions which are very good, whether they are 
sustained by this Code or not should 

Shri A. C. Shukla: Are they recorded ? 

Shri T. N. Singh : We live in this country and know them. It is, 
therefore, improper to axe these good traditions and I would like 
that either this clause should be removed altogether or it should be 
adjusted in the next clause. It should be considered after that, that 
would be proper. To pass it just now in this form is not proper. 

*Ch. Ranbir Singh (Punjab): ( English translation of the Hindi 
speech ) I have risen to support amendments No. 420 proposed by 
Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava and No. 288 of Shri Bhatt. Shri Bhatt 
by his amendement means that if some customs or usages clash with 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 22nd September 1951, pp. 3142-50. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1283 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1283 

the Hindu code Bill, then that clash should not be regarded in the 
light that the custom is abolished, but it should be allowed to continue 
for ten years and after that period it should be regarded as finished. 
Amendment No. 420 by Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava means that those 
customs which are in accordance with the Hindu Code Bill should be 
regarded as abolished ; and those customs which are left, their power 
or their legality should be retained. Whatever has been said by my 
learned friend Shri Pande, I agee to that and this thing is right and 
very much heartening. The real purpose of the Hindu Code Bill was 
considered to be that this Bill was being brought forward to introduce 
some reforms in the country to remove the prevailing social evils from 
the society and to bring about some changes in it. How many people 
would be affected by it has to be taken into consideration and as he 
said I regard the imposition of this Hindu Code Bill from the backdoor 
upon those people of this country who were free from it uptil now, as 
an act of abuse of power. 

Shri A. C. Shukla : Even if they do not want it they must have it. 

Ch. Ranbir Singh : Shri Shukla has not understood the meaning 
of the word imposition used by me, or he has not heard it properly. If 
he says that the imposition which I have said is wrong then perhaps 
I would like to know from him whether he can quote any example in 
which any person from the Punjab, may he be a Hindu or a Sikh or 
a Muslim, has ever raised his voice that their customary law should 
be abolished and in place of that they should have the law of Manu, 
or of Yajnavalkya or of anybody else. 

Shri A. C. Shukla : When they will become educated they would 
demand that. 

Ch. Ranbir Singh: Perhaps Shri Shukla does not know how 
dynamic personalities have born in our Punjab who have challenged 
the authorities of our country, although, I do not support them but 
this is an historical fact that during the recent years nobody had been 
able to defeat a Congress candidate in the Hindu majority areas, but 
in the Punjab there was a constituecy in Haryana, which is a Hindu 
majority area, in which Ch. Chottu Ram had defeated a Congress 
candidate. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Ch. Chottu Ram was a great friend of Hindus. 

Ch. Ranbir Singh : In case the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar has got any 
document or any other proof about it, I am ready to accept that. But 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1284 


1284 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

as far as his objective is concerned I am not opposed to that. I am a 
supporter of monogamy and I want that in some special circumstances 
arrangement for divorce should also be made so that when some 
difficulty is felt on both sides, by the man as well as by the woman 
in living together, a way must be found out to save them from that 
difficulty. But along with it I cannot help saying that this attempt is 
nothing but an act of abuse of power, because we should have applied 
this Hindu Code Bill to those only who wanted to be governed by it. 

Since this question of Hindu Code Bill has come before this House, 
it has taken several months and many a day has been spent upon 
it, I tried hard to snatch some minutes so that I might express 
my views about it, but unfortunately I could not get a chance. 
Unfortunately, when Sardar Man spoke about it, instead of coming 
to the right thing he got himself entangled in the labyrinth of the 
Sikh religion, perhaps he might have thought that in this way 
his point would be more forceful or there might have been some 
other reason. However, I think that this question is not related so 
Sikhism alone, this is a question pertaining to the customary laws 
of the whole of the Punjab. I want to bring to the notice of the Hon. 
Dr. Ambedkar that even in such a time when such Brahmanic rules 
and regulations with regard to the living customs of the country and 
the society were being enforced rigidly, viz., one could not go in a 
particular direction on Mondays or on Tuesdays or on Saturdays, 
the martial race of the Jats in the Punjab, to which I and the Hon. 
Sardar Baldev Singh belong, did not yield to the Brahmanic rules 
and it has not done so even now. I want to submit that really in 
our society there is no likelihood of any appreciable opposition to 
the two provisions relating to monogamy and divorce, and I am 
not personally against them, but I am opposed to the method and 
manner which you are resorting to. And the manner or the backdoor 
method through which it has developed is not a proper one. This 
is not because I regard myself a Non-Hindu but I do feel that we 
have never been governed by the Hindu code and it has never been 
enforced with ragard to us. I doubt your intentions that you can 
govern by the backdoor policy those whom you could not enslave 
mentally. I disagree with you to a great extent with regard to the 
rules and regulations which you are enacting in respect of marriage 
and divorce without caring for the prevailing customs. I want to 
state with respect to this that many reformers of society have done a 
great many reforms in the Hindu Society with regard to the widow’s 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1285 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1285 

plight but I want to point out that a young widow has remained an 
unknown thing to our society from times immemorial. Our society 
does not know the name of a young widow, because it is a custom 
in our community that when the husband of a woman dies, then 
after a year of his death the brothers and parents of the widow and 
the relations of her late husband meet together and in spite of the 
shyness, as is common everywhere in our Hindu society, and against 
her formal wish, that she would herself bear the distress that has 
befallen her, and in spite of her refusal, she is told that this is not 
possible. It may be said that her ideal is good, but how many people 
are there who can follow such a high ideal ? The people of our society 
doubt whether such a lofty ideal which you are going to establish in 
our society would not create any evil in our society. Therefore, you 
should recognise our simple custom of remarriage and not invalidate 
it. So I wanted to support the proposition laid down by Shri Bhatt. 
Now I mention the reasons for that. 

On the one hand where your rules and regulations wanted to 
reduce the troubles of our womenfolk, and they have reduced them to 
a great extent, on the other hand their troubles have been increased 
manifold. And that is because you have given them a sort of right to 
marry wherever they want. In the ordinary way, if no extraordinary 
trouble arises it would easily become a custom that they could remarry, 
but why do you lay dow this restriction ? Generally people are not 
bigamous of their own will but they are forced by circumstances. If 
a brother dies, his brother has to concede to the custom of bigamy 
against his wishes. 

Shrimati Dixit: I want to ask you a question. There is a woman, 
who has got four or six children, there is her husband’s brother’s 
wife, she also has got four or six children. If they are made to live 
together would not the co-wifely feeling create trouble between them ? 
Is it not unjustifiable on principle to force a woman to marry another 
man against her wishes ? 

Sardar Hukam Singh (Punjab): By the will of god. 

Ch. Ranbir Singh : If you mean remarriage by that, I would say 
no : remarriage is possible only when it is regularly sanctioned by 
society, but there are many women who cannot express their desire. 
After thirteen or fourteen days of his wife’s death a man may express 
it, but the women cannot do so due to the peculiar set-up of our society 
such a thing is impossible, and ample time is required to change that. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1286 


1286 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

But if she meant this that if there is a brother, who has got two or 
three children and a wife and he has a brother who is about to die, 
and he also has got two or three children and his wife, that they are 
made to live together it would create dificulties and trouble would 
arise. If she wants to know about that, I am coming to that point also. 
I confess it and everybody in our society would confess it that nobody 
resorts to bigamy willingly and that the woman is also helpless, because 
she loves her children and she cannot leave the two or three orphans, 
for where could they find shelter. She cannot say that she wants to 
remarry and the other members of the household also cannot leave 
the children, then the question arises whether she should take her 
children with her. But this is a custom in our society and I think, you 
may enact any law but you cannot change it. This is not a matter of 
joke. They themselves could change it but you cannot change it today. 

There is another custom in our society. It is their belief that even 
the most foolish man belonging to a particular family would not allow 
his children to go to another family, and if a man tries to do so very 
severe punishment has been prescribed for him in our community. 
Even if you say that our community is backward and it is very difficult 
to improve it, the result of such an action among us is still murder. 
If you want that the number of murders and assassinations should 
increase in our society, the Punjab is already notorious for murders 
and assassinations, for many people are hanged there for such murders 
etc. — if you want to increase their number you are at liberty to impose 
any rules and regulations on them immediately. But if you want to 
decrease the number of murders and assassinations and the sentences 
of death, I would request you to accept the amendment of Shri Bhatt 
or of Shri Bhargava. 

So I was saying that either a woman, if she loves her children, will 
be forced to live as a widow for the rest of her life, as has never been 
done in her community before, or, if she does not love her children, 
she might take them stealthily to some other place at night and if 
she meets some daring person who says that he would see how others 
could harm him the result would be that either she would become a 
widow again or her husband would be hanged. But, in any case, she 
would not remain a fortunate wife, though this is a big and a terrifying 
thing, but it is a fact. 

Then there is the question of sagotra marriage. How many men 
and women live in the cities ? I want to state my own reactions 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1287 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1287 

about this Hindu Code Bill. In this house the majority of members 
come from the urban areas. Those who were born and brought up 
in the cities confine their thoughts to the rules and regulations 
and manners and customs of the cities. They think there is a vast 
difference between town life and village life, they have got no 
experience about it. I give a simple example. For instance, take the 
case of a city. If a woman there does not want to marry nobody would 
object. But if in a village a girl attains about the sixteen of age, not 
ony does distress befall her parent but that girl is persecuted too. 
Everybody comes to the father and says, “why do you not arrange 
for the mrriage of your girl ?” The girl might be bitterly opposed 
to marriage but she cannot avoid marrage. She is forced to do so; 
this theory might be good or bad but this is a fact. From this very 
example you can differentiate between the mode of life in a town 
and that of a village and see how much difference is there between 
them; and still you want to enact a common law for both. My friend 
Shir Jangde spoke so forcefully. He spoke for others but I suspect 
Shri Jangde has become a townsman or has gone to their side. 
He is coming to appreciate the urban way of life. He wants to tell 
his own tale and not that of the people of his own place. So I was 
submitting that when there is so much difference between the two 
modes of life, there is such a vast difference between their social 
conditions, and you want to enact a law which will be applicable 
to all irrespective of their customs and usages, it would be a great 
injustice to them. 

There is another point I would like to touch upon in this connection 
and that is with regard to sagotra marriage. Unlike the customs 
obtaining among us in Punjab, here we find that most of the girls 
are usually married locally. Taking the case of Delhi itself, it will be 
seen that girls from one part of the city are married in the other part 
of the city. Even in the small towns having a population of say ten 
thousand they are married likewise. Under the circumstances, they 
are not conversant with the customs regarding marriage prevailing 
among us. In keeping with the custom obtaining among us, I cannot 
get my son married among my own subcaste which is spread over 
as many as 24 villages situated within a radius of no less than ten 
miles. It is not that he cannot be married in only those 24 villages, 
even the villages numbering about 30 to 40 where the families of his 
mother’s subcaste are settled are ruled out for the purpose of such 
matrimony. Things do not end here. I cannot get my son married to 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1288 


1288 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a girl from any of the thirty to forty villages, where people of my 
mother’s subcaste live. That is to say, I cannot find a bride for my son 
from amongst a hundred neighbouring villages or so. 

Shri A. C. Shukla : Is it a healthy practice or otherwise ? 

Ch. Ranbir Singh : I never laid any claim to this effect. It is none of 
my intention to annoy him in the way the Hon. Doctor did. Unlike him 
I cannot dare utter anything unpleasant things. In contrast with the 
big personality of the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar I am but an humble Member. 

Shri Radhelal Vyas (Madhya Bharat): But you are also Jat. 

Ch. Ranbir Singh : Of course, I am but not a Sikh Jat like Sardar 
Bhopinder Singh Man. I do not want to enter into any controversy — and 
thereby cause offence to anyone — as to whether our custom is better or 
other’s or whether or not this measure is of any use. What I want is 
simply to apprise you of our customs which; for instance, prevent me 
from getting my son married in about as many as one hundred to one 
hundred twenty villages. How under such a state of affairs, can those 
women residing in small towns or even in big cities, be supposed to have 
any real estimate of the extent of hardships and difficulties which we 
are subjected to while facing such issues, because for them marriage is 
no more than a mere routine affair that could be performed from one 
mohalla to the other ? 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : There is no difference between 
Hindu Law and your law in so far as this matter is concerned. 

Ch. Ranbir Singh : There may not be any difference in the laws but 
the developments do vary. According to our customs we cannot establish 
matrimonial connections among some certain gotras. None can dare go 
against such a custom. Even the most backward person — under the 
present social structure such a man is bound to be treated as such, 
although in future he may be called progressive — cannot possibly take 
such a step. In fact none has got so much courage, so to say. But what 
you are doing today is, if I may say so, simply enabling such a man, by 
law, to take such a step. 

Shri A. C. Shukla : What is it that the hon. Member wants ? 

Ch. Ranbir Singh : I am not going to say what I want. I would, on 
the other hand, only want to apprise the House of the various customs 
prevailing. That is why I am pleading for Shri Bhatt’s amendment to 
be accepted. Let developments be closely watched during the next ten 
years, the truth will express itself in the right manner. If our course of 
action would be correct you would, I am sure, change over to our side 
or, otherwise, we would do the same thing. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1289 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1289 

So I was referring to the fact that even in the present days 
sagotra marriages are not being performed. But there is no denying 
the fact that rules and regulations have great force on their back. 
Supposing a man with the help of this law seeks to get married 
in the same village or among the same gotra, what would be the 
possible consequences ? He is likely to meet the same fate as I have 
described earlier. It is not that I want to exaggerate things in any 
way, but, all the same, let me point out what I consider to be a 
serious drawback in our present day society. Supposing any member 
of my family gets married in such a manner, nobody would care to 
ascertain my view in the matter. If my brother commits any wrong 
of this type, it may be that I may also be murdered simply because 
I happen to be his brother, regardless of the fact whether my views 
are in his favour or otherwise. None is going to ask me to explain 
my view point. Such is the sorry state of affairs in our community. 
Indeed how strange it looks that they judge the doings of one brother 
from those of the others ! Here, in your society, three brothers can 
hold three different views — one can be a Communist, the second 
a Socialist and the third Congressite. To be more precise, if a man 
here is a member of the Bharatiya Jan Sangh, it is open to his 
brother to join any other party. But things at our end are quite the 
reverse. If any one member of a certain family there joins Congress, 
the entire family would be automatically deemed to be Congress site 
regardless of the fact whether it be so or not. Such is the condition 
of our community. Now, it is for you to call it whatever you like — 
progress or otherwise. I, for one, under such circumstances, stand 
for monogamy in our society. In a country like ours; especially in a 
community which I belong to namely Jats, monogamy is particularly 
essential, for among us the number of boys is more than girls. A man 
have two wives only by encroaching upon the share of any one of his 
fellow beings. Under the practice of monogamy, comparatively larger 
number of men would be provided with wives which is otherwise 
not possible. It is just possible there may be such regions in this 
country where the number of women is more than men. {English 
translation concluded). 

Sardar B. S. Man (Punjab): In Madras they have. 

Ch. Ranbir Singh: But the difficulty is that a Hindu Jat of our 
side is not so broad-minded as to go as far as Madras ; a Sikh Jat may 
go. I for one consider monogamy to be a step in the right direction ; 
but the difficulty is that our society has not yet so advanced, or shall 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 1290 

1290 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I say, degenerated, so as to agree to the practice of sagotra marriage. 
Let it be postponed for ten years, after that this issue may be taken 
afresh for consideration, if by that time the society succeeds in reaching 
that height of advancement, which would clear the field for such steps, 
we would accept it; otherwise it would keep on pending. We do not, 
of course, approve of the practice of what we call forced bigamy, but, 
all the same, the practice continues in our society, though it is not so 
common. Give us ten years’ time during which we may make efforts 
to do away with such a practice. 

In the end once again I take this opportunity to submit to the Hon. 
Dr. Ambedkar that although, I am a whole-hearted supporter of this 
measure. I would like him to accept either Shri Bhatt’s amendment or 
amendment No. 420 moved by Shri Bhargava. 

Shri Sivan Pillay (Travancore-Cochin): Sir, let the question be 
now put. 

Captain A. P. Singh (Vindhya Pradesh): No, Sir. At least those 
who have moved amendment may be given an opportunity to speak. 

Sardar B. S. Man : Yes, Sir. This is a very important point. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I shall call Mr. Jhunjhunwala and after him 
Shri Bhatt. They have tabled amendments. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: Sir, I have also tabled amendments. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I shall call them in this order, and then I 
shall consider any other name. 

*Shri Jhunjhunwala (Bihar): ( English translation of the Hindi speech). 

All my three amendments are in consonance with the Constitution. 

My first amendment provides that if this Code contains 
12 Noon . . .. , 

anything against any religion, no clause ot this Bill shall 

override the provisions of the existing law; the second amendment 

provides that if this Code contains anything against morality, the Bill 

shall not override the provisions of any existing law, or any custom 

or usage in force ; and the third provides that if this Code contains 

anything against the culture of any section of the people, the Bill shall 

not override the existing law. 

Sir, when I had moved the third amendment, you had asked 
as to what would be the form and definition of the word ‘culture’. 
Yesterday, in this connection, I had wrongly quoted Article 129 of 


P.D., Vol. 15, Part II, 22nd September 1951, pp. 3168-88. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1291 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1291 

the Constitution empowering every section of people to have a culture 
of its own and to conserve the same. In fact it is Article 29 and not 
Article 129 — which reads : — 

“29. (1) Any section of the citizens residing in the territory of India 
or any part thereof having a distinct language, script or culture of its 
own shall have the right to conserve the same.” 

That is why I have put in the word ‘culture’ here. The Hindu code, 
in keeping with the Constitution, cannot contain anything whatsoever 
that would deprive any section of people, or any community of its 
right to preserve its own religion or culture. I shall deal with my 
amendments later on. It will be recalled here that you had given 
a ruling to the effect that one should take the opportunity to deal 
with any other amendment or clause while speaking on his own 
amendment, or otherwise he would not be allowed to do so afterwards. 
It is because of this that I purpose to take this clause first and the 
amendments later on. Moreover, that would be more convenient to me. 

Sir, when the Hindu Code Bill, which is now sought to be passed 
under another title, namely ‘Marriage and Divorce Bill’, was placed 
before the House, it was said to have contained two main things. It is 
argued in this behalf that this Hindu Code Bill, or say, Marriage and 
Divorce Amendment Bill, is sought to be passed in view of the two 
main objectives which it aims at. In the first place, the measure is 
stated to be progressive ; and secondly, it is described as a legislation 
that would go a long way to provide women with their due rights 
hitherto denied to them. Men have so far been very unjust to women 
and it is with a view to eradicating this evil that this legislation is 
sought to be enacted. Now, let us see whether or not this measure is 
progressive. The Hon. Minister of Law did not give any definition of 
the word ‘progressive’ that might distinguish between things which 
are progressive and those which are not. It was stated from this side 
that the Hindu religion was one of a very long standing and was 
based on true scientific principles which alone are responsible for its 
survival so far despite so may atrocities commiteed on it. Replying 
to this suggestion the Hon. Law Minister was please to state that 
it was Lord Buddha who had disclosed the true path of the religion. 
The Buddha, Dr. Ambedkar said, could not tolerate to see women 
being subjected to men’s continuous oppression and having no rights 
whatsoever. It made Buddha’s heart bleed to see men having more 
rights than women and committing all sorts of atrocities on them. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1292 


1292 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

It was this treatment of discrimination against one sex, the Hon. Law 
Minister went on to say, that led Lord Buddha to preach equality among 
men and women. By quoting the Hon. Doctor here I simply want to 
impress that the Bill in question is stated to have been brought forward 
in accordance with the Buddha’s teachings. Lord Buddha, a great figure as 
he was, was undoubtedly religious-minded. Let us, therefore, closely study 
as to what was the real object which he aimed at. Here I am reminded 
Sir, of a couplet of Sant Jnaneshwar, a renowned Maharashtriyan poet, 
the actual words of which I do not quite recollect at the moment but it 
means something like this : A frog accompanied by a bee entered a tank 
where there were lotus flowers blooming on the water. The bee sat on 
the lotus and sucked its honey; it carried away with it honey and fine 
smell. But the frog which had accompanied the bee to the tank could 
only bring some mud and durt. 

Sardar Hukam Singh in the Chair 

Sir, the Buddha preached that the more we are able to subdue our 
evil desires, the better it is, for it would only help us to serve the society 
and then humanity as a whole in a better way. This was the highlight 
of his teachings. But, Sir, it is something extremely astonishing and 
painful too, that our Law Minister could not find any such suggestion 
in his teachings. What he could make out was that since men had had 
right of polygamy, women too must have the right to divorce in order 
that the effects of the former could be neutralised. I would request you 
sir, as also the hon. Members here, just to see what type of equality is 
sought to be given by this Bill. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Is this all relevant on clause 4 ? Let us have some 
regard for relevancy. We could not altogether abandon the rule of 
relevancy. 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava : Relevancy is not the sole monopoly of the 
Law Minister. 

Mr. Chairman : I would request hon. Members to leave this question 
to me. The Hon. Minister has asked me to decide it. 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava : But he himself pronounced the judgement — 
he did not refer it to you. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Relevancy ought to be also your monopoly — not only 
mine. 

Pandit M. B. Bhargava: It is yours 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1293 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1293 

Mr. Chairman: There should not be any cross-questions and answers. 
I would again request Hon. Members to have greater restraint on 
themselves. I would ask the Hon. member who is speaking that he 
should be more relevant in his speech. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala: I was quite relevant in pointing out on to 
where the equality exists and where it is that we should give equal 
right to the women. 

My friend Shri Thakur Das Bhargava observed 

Mr. Chairman : I must tell him that that is not the real issue at 
the moment, that is whether equality should exist or not. He may refer 
to customs and other things, but equality is not the direct issue at this 
moment. We should have regard to that. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala: May I explain to you sir, as to how these 
things relate to the real issue. I had in the beginning submitted that 
the Hon. Minister of Law had advocated two main points in support of 
this measure. Firstly, he described this Bill as a progressive measure, 
and secondly, he stated that this Bill sought to put women, who had 
not got equal rights, on equal footing with men. And now this clause 4 
provides that the provisions of the Bill shall override all other things. 
As I said before, I shall first deal with this clause. In my opinion the 
measure itself is of no use when it does not go to fulfil either of the 
two things that are advocated in its support. Hence I am just trying 
to convince the Law Minister that the measure he has put before the 
House is absurd altogether and does not conform with the two main 
points which he has advocated. As a matter of fact, the measure 
ought not to have come at all. That is the point which I wanted the 
House to take note of. I may, with your permission Sir, make a few 
more observations in this connection and they would clear the whole 
thing, for otherwise the argument itself would become meaningless. 
I would, therefore, like you to appreciate the fact that this measure 
is neither progressive nor does it seek to provide women with their 
due rights as was advocated when the Bill was brought forward. If 
the clause relating to property had been taken. I could understand 
it because so far as property is concerned, our women have not got 
equal rights, they are suffering great hardships on this account and 
are subjected to innumerable atrocities. I am sorry Shrimati Durgabai 
is not here at the moment; she was kind enough to narrate some 
heart-rending tales with regard to women in Madras thereby causing 
much pain to all of us here. The question will be dealt with at length 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1294 


1294 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

while taking up the property clause. If in reality the Law Minister 
was very serious about our women’s betterment, he should have taken 
up property clause first, because we cannot possibly help women take 
their proper place in society unless their economic condition is well 
improved and they are made absoultely free in that sphere. Hence, I 
cannot understand why that clause is not taken first. It is none of my 
intention to criticise his motives, but, all the same, I cannot but say that 
his real object is apparently different from what he is advocating. By 
bringing forward this measure he seems to be intending to exterminate 
the Hindu religion, Hindu society and the Hindu customs and usage, 
thereby bringing moral degradation of the Hindu society. His aim 
seems to be no other than this. By taking the property clause first 
and thereby seeing that women’s economic conditions are improved, 
we could have given them some solid relief. Many an Hon. Members 
pleaded for this but there was our Law Minister constantly nodding 
his head in disapproval. He perhaps does not like us to take the credit 
of doing something for our women which would help them and redress 
their grievances. 

I was just referring to my friend Shri Bhargava’s view that divorce 
was a thing which he did not like and as a matter of fact very few 
persons have supported it. The reason is that it is not a good thing. 
I may just give you an idea as to what would happen if divorce is 
enforced. Daily the youths of our country would read in the papers 
that so many cases of divorce took place that day and that such and 
such person divorced his or her partner. The newspaper published in 
my friend Shri Brij Kishore’s village in Bihar and also that which Shri 
Syamnandan Sahaya is going to bring out, would report such cases 
and they would read them. Out of all persons, Shri Brij Kishore seems 
to have seen greatest advantages in divorce. He would read these 
reports very enthusiastically. I am rather sorry that he is not here at 
this time otherwise he could know what madness he was indulging in 
while talking like that. 

Sir, I was submitting what my friend Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava 
said that divorce was not a good thing. But he stated the reasons why 
he favoured the idea. He said that in the clause relating to divorce 
a provision was being made to make it optional. According to him it 
was a very important provison. He said that it was only an enabling 
clause. But I would submit that a number of enabling clauses have 
been passed here. The Hon. Minister of Industry and the Hon. Minister 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1295 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1295 

of Commerce have often taken refuge under this ‘enabling clause’. 
They have said the same thing about Coca-Cola. They say if it is being 
manufactured, let it be ; it is only an enabling clause. Similarly there 
is this enabling clause related to divorce. I would like to ask one thing 
from Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava. Suppose there are two sons of a 
father and one of them has married three wives. Now the other fellow 
goes and tell his father that if his brother could marry three and spend 
so much, then what should he do. 

Dr. Ambedkar: He may marry four. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : The father replied that he could marry five. So, 
according to Pandit Thakur Das’s theory, if a son marries three wives, 
the other should marry five. Why after all he should lag behind ? This 
is the right he wants to give. But our friend Shri Syamnandan Sahaya 
is a staunch baniya. What would he say ? He would say that if he has 
married three wives, he should immediately be turned out. 

Mr. Chairman : I would request the hon. Member to discuss the 
subject of marriages when the question of monogamy is taken up. We are 
now discussing customs and rules and it would be better if he confines 
himself on matters relating to this subject only. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : He means to suggest that one son 
would divorce three wives and the other five. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : Sir, I would abide by your ruling and strictly 
follow it, but as I submitted in the beginning 

Mr. Chairman: He can certainly speak on this clause. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala: I was speaking on the marriage clause. 

Mr. Chairman : Not on the marriage clause. Clause 4 is under 
discussion. 

Sardar B. S. Man : On a point of information. While discussing the 
present clause and while moving certain amendments to the effect that 
from its effect certain customs may be excluded, we have to place our 
case by showing that those customs should be excluded for valid reasons. 
In that case, I suppose we are entitled to refer to the customs that are 
at variance with the Hindu Code and thus base our case that customs 
which have a long history, which have been recognised as such and which 
are not repugnant to public policy and thus which have the force of law 
should be permitted. In that respect, I beg to say that it is perfectly 
within the rights of Members to refer to the customs even in detail. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1296 


1296 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Mr. Chairman: It has already been laid down that as far as 
particular customs are concerned, they might be taken up when the 
particular clauses are under discussion. So far as the relevancy about 
this general clause is concerned, you can discuss in a general way and 
say that such and such a custom is very old and it has been uniformly 
observed. You can say that much about the status of a custom, but if 
we were to take up all the customs and discuss them there will be no 
end to. There are the relevant clauses and when they are taken up each 
particular custom can be discussed. That would be the better place. I 
do not bar this discussion. I am only requesting the Hon. Member and 
suggesting to him that that would be the more proper place. Here, he 
can discuss in a general way. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : Sir, I will speak according to your ruling. But 
I would like to submit that I could not get an opportunity to speak on 
clause 2, although the Hon. Speaker ruled that, as in the case of clause 2. 
Members could speak practically on all matters while discussing 
clause 4. Only the clause relating to property, could not be discussed. 
I am pointing out to the House the advantages and disadvantages of 
the provisions relating to divorce and marriage. I think I was never 
irrelevant. Anyway, I would now abide by your ruling, and briefly 
submit my view point. I now come to my amendments. 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : Very good. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Take your seat now. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala: I will take my seat, you kindly withdraw this 
Code and relieve the Hindu Community of it. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Please sit down. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala: You leave and I will sit down. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Take your seat, or I will go. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala: You go, and I will also sit. 

Mr. Chairman: I would ask the Hon. Member to continue his speech. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : I am coming to my speech but the Law 
Minister, who is a responsible person, is indulging in unnecessary 
interruptions. He wants that this thing should be talked over and 
Government’s money be spent somehow. He is not so anxious to grant 
equal rights to women but he is more keen to see that Government’s 
money is spent somehow so that people outside might know that the 
Law Minister is not idle. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1297 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1297 

Mr. Chairman : May I request the Hon. Member that he should 
proceed with his speech instead of answering these questions. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : Sir, I am prepared to abide by your orders. 
But when any Hon. Member interrupts, it becomes difficult to proceed 
further and it also takes more time to come to the speech proper. 

Dr. Ambedkar: Do not get nervous, they are your comrades. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : Comrades also desert sometimes. I have had 
a number of comrades like you. You have been professing yourself to be 
a champion of women’s cause, but ultimately deserted them. 

Sir, I am continuing with my speech but the Hon. Minister interrupts. 

Sardar B. S. Man : Will it not be discourteous to the Hon. Law 
Minister to ignore the interruptions and not to reply to it ? 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : Then there is another point which I would 
like to submit. Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava said that if anything is 
suggested that might lead to some harm and if anybody is doing a wrong 
thing, then how far is it proper to ask others also to do the same thing ? 
How far is it wise to ask women to do wrong to men if the latter are 
behaving in that manner ? That is what I am going to point out. 

Then we have to see whether this thing is progressive or not. Our 
Hon. Minister of Home Affairs, Shri Rajaji is not here at present. He 
made some remark while referring the Press Bill to Select Committee. 
He said that an article or a caricature about him (I do not exactly 
remember what it was) appeared in some paper. When he saw it, he 
found it most revolting and at the same time very obscene. He did not 
know why it was published and felt it very much. But he said when 
he saw the news papers of the present day, he felt there was nothing 
special in that paper which should have offended him ( Interruptions ). 
My hon. Friends are trying to interrupt me. 

Mr. Chairman : If you address the Chair perhaps you will not feel 
that inconvenience. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : I am accustomed to look all round while 
speaking. 

So, he said that it was quite insignificant. As compared to the articles 
and caricatures that appear in the present day press, that thing did 
not seem to be obscene at all. He said he felt it unnecessarily. The 
newspapers force us to see and read those things that we do not like 
to see, and young men and women of the country read them. God 
knows what influence those things might be leaving on our youths. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1298 


1298 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Now, I wanted to ask at that time whether these articles etc. that 
appear in our press are progressive. These are far more obscene than 
that which you thought to be quite vulgar. Then, are they progressive 
and if they are progressive do they prove beneficial for us ? So, I wanted 
to point out that our Law Minister who is the Manu of Kaliyug 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Not the Manu of Kaliyug but Kaliyugi 
Manu. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : We are living in Kaliyug hence I called him 
the Manu of Kaliyug. Our Hon. Minister Shri Gadgil who considers 
himself to be an outcast Brahmin and thinks he is a Pandit has given 
him this title. All that I mean to say is that he is the Manu of this 
age. I wanted to know whether the purpose of this progressive measure 
is to uplift our society or to degrade and demoralize it. I could have 
understood the whole thing if he had convinced me beofre I had moved 
my amendments that the measure was progressive in such and such 
manner. He only said that it was progressive and that women should 
be given equal rights. He has denied those rights to them that they 
needed most and which could have benefited them very much. The 
right which he is giving to them is that of divorce. So, I was trying 
to point out whether this is really progressive. I say this can never be 
progressive. If a person does something wrong, it is not wise that I 
should also repeat the same thing for that reason. On the other hand, 
such legislation should be made whereby the person doing a wrong 
thing might be forbidden to do it in future. It should not be that the 
other person may also be asked to follow him. 

That was about this clause. Now, I would move my amendments and 
fully express my views on them. I have already read them out and so 
I would not read them again. This will take more time. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : How would we understand and vote 
upon them. 

Mr. Chairman : Has he already read them ? 

Shri Jhunjhunwala: Yes Sir, I have read them. 

Mr. Chairman : Then there is no necessity of reading them again. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : We have to vote upon them. You must 
read them. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : My first amendment is that if anything in 
the Code is against the Hindu, Sikh, Jain or Buddhist religions or 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1299 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1299 

against Marumakkattayam and Aliyasanthanam laws, then it shall 
not apply to them. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It shall apply only to the marwaris. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : Had it not applied to the marwaris, even 
then I would not have sat. This code is dangerously harmful to the 
society and the country. 

Mr. Chairman: The Hon. Member should continue. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : The Hon. Minister is interrupting and casting 
aspersions. Our Constitution provides for equal rights. Why do you not 
allow me to reply to his remarks ? 

Mr. Chairman : I am also asking him not to interrupt, the Hon. 
Member may go on. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : You turn towards him and then say, so that 
he may hear. 

Mr. Chairman : I have acquired this habit from the Hon. Member. 
I would ask the Hon. Minister not to interrupt. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : Now in this connection, I would like to read 
before the House Article 25 of the Constitution. I would request the 
Hon. Members to listen patiently: 

“25. (1) Subject to public order, morality and health and to the other 
provisions of this Part, all persons are equally entitled to freedom 
of conscience and the right freely to profess practice and propagate 
religion.” 

(2) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any existing 
law or prevent the State from making any law — 

(a) regulating or restricting any economic, financial, political or 
other secular activity which may be associated with religious practice;” 

Babu Ramnarayan Singh : Kindly translate it into Hindi. 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : You engage a teacher for that. Then there is : 

“(b) providing for social welfare and reform or the throwing open 
of Hindu religious institutions of a public character to all classes and 
sections of Hindus.” 

After that there is explanation which I need not read. So I submit 
to the Chair and the Hon. Members of this House that the purpose 
of my amendments is that when you make an effort to introduce 
reforms, you have no right to touch our Dharmshastras. But you can 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 1300 

1300 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

bring in any measure if it does not conflict with our shastras and our 
religion. My amendment relates to the following : 

“any text, rule, or interpretation of Hindu law, or any custom or 
usage or any other law in force immediately prior to the commencement 
of this Code shall cease to have effect as respects any of the matters 
dealt with in this Code.” 

“Any other law in force immediately before the commencement of this 
Code shall cease to have effect in so far as it is inconsistent with the 
provisions of this Code.” 

I want to submit that I have no objection to this legislation. It is 
alright but if there is anything which is against any religion, Hindu, 
Sikh or Jain then it would not apply to it. 

Shir Naziruddin Ahmad : And Muslims ? 

Shri Jhunjhunwala : Muslims do not come in the purview of this 
Bill. Then, in the next amendment, there is morality in place of religion. 
You cannot provide for anything in the law which has its effect on the 
morality of the people and which leads to their moral degeneration. 
This is what I have to say. This amendment should be added. We have 
been given this right under the Constitution. If this amendment is not 
accepted, I would think that our Government is slandering and vilifying 
our religion. They should not do it. 

My third amendment is based on Article 29, wherein the following 
has been said about culture: 

“29. (1) Any section of the citizens residing in the territory of India 
or any part thereof having a distinct language, script or culture of its 
own shall have the right to conserve the same.” 

My submission is that if this code affects or comes in conflict with 
our culture or the culture of Hindus, Sikhs, Jains or the culture of any 
section of the Hindus, then again it shall not be applicable under those 
circumstances . 

[Mr. Deputy Speaker in the Chair ] 

Therefore, while moving these threee amendments before the House,. I 
would urge the Hon. Members to accept my amendments first and then 
pass the clause. In the first instance I would ask them, not to pass the 
clause at all but if they pass it my amendments should also be accepted 
along with it. I would not take any more time now and finish. 


(English translation concluded). 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1301 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1301 

An Hon. Member: Closure, Sir. 

Shri Bharati : I move that the question be now put. 

Several Hon. Members : No ; no. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The lion. Members will kindly take their 
seats. I will put the question to the House. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : Before that, Sir, I beg to state that we 
have submitted amendments. We have a right to speak on them. We 
have something to say upon them. The merits of our amendments 
should be discussed. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I agree. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : One more submission Sir. You had 
just now announced that after Mr. Jhunjhunwala, Mr. Bhatt would 
speak and that after that, you would decide as to what should happen. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: I least expected that the Hon. Member Mr. 
Jhunjhunwala would take up so much time. His amendment is a very 
small one. He has taken too much time. I thought that within that 
time two Hon. Members might speak. We have had a discussion on this 
particular clause since yesterday. So far as this clause is concerned, if 
it had stood alone, I would not have come to any conclusion. We have 
discussed this to a large extent on the definition clause, what custom 
is, what its ingredients are, and so on. Taking both of them together, 
I feel that there has been sufficient discussion on this. Therefore, I 
shall put the motion to the House. Let the House accept it or reject it. 

Shri Bhatt: There is an amendment in my name also. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : As Mr. Naziruddin Ahmad stated, we 
have tabled amendments. We wanted to speak on clause 2 also. After 
all, even if you pass this clause today, this matter is not finished. 
There are 50 or 55 clauses to be gone through. Therefore, I wish 
to make this submission. This is a very important clause because 
it is here that we lay down that the texts will not be taken into 
consideration. It is a matter of very primary importance. It will be 
another matter if we are dealing with clauses about procedural matter, 
clauses laying down the procedure for marriage and divorce. You may 
accept a closure or proceed comparatively quickly. But the question 
whether the texts should be abrogated, whether custom should be 
abrogated, that is a very vital matter. Therefore, I will again submit 
most respectfully this. If you are going to finish the Bill today and 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1302 


1302 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the Act is going to be passed, then, it is a different matter and we will 
submit to the closure. That is not the case and therefore we should allow 
time to the movers of the amendments. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : How can you say that ? 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : We have to go through 55 clauses. So 
far as this clause is concerned, you should allow some more discussion. 
I think in this matter I have the opinion of a good number of Members 
on my side. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : May I submit in all humility, Sir, 
that sometimes when amendments are moved in this House by a large 
number of members and the real intention of the mover is to get a chance 
to speak, the situation is quite different. When, on a Bill particular 
amendments are given, I beg of you kindly to see if the amendment is 
one of substance. Then, the person moving the amendments should be 
allowed to speak ordinarily. 

Shri Bharati: It is left to the discretion of the Chair. 

Pandit Malaviya (Uttar Pradesh): There are still many people who 
wish to speak on this point, and even though the House may pass the 
thing, I feel that in a matter of this nature, the least that we can do is 
to listen to them and then come to any decision. I feel therefore, that 
we should allow people an opportunity to speak. And indeed, if there is 
an opportunity, I myself would like to say something about this clause. 
I hope, sir, we will have the opportunity at least to have our say. The 
House may not agree with our view; but I feel it will be tyranny if we 
are not allowed an opportunity even to have our say. There might have 
been a good deal of discussion on any point, but that does not mean that 
we should not give an opportunity to those who have not been able to 
have their say. Therefore, I humbly request that you may kindly allow 
the discussion on this to go on. 

Shri Bharati : Sir, it is absolutely within your discretion to decide, 
after taking into consideration the totality of the circumstances. We 
cannot 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : I can only appeal to the Chair that 
since there are many who have yet to 

Dr. Ambedkar : There has been sufficient debate already and 
( Interruptions ) Sir, I would like to submit that in deciding whether 
closure should be applied or not, the issue is not whether every Member 
who wants to speak has spoken. The issue is whether there has been 
sufficient discussion or not. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1303 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1303 

Shri Syamnadan Sahaya : But every Member who ought to 
speak should have been allowed to speak. And, sir, you yourself 
said that you would allow me to move my amendment to make this 
provision consistent with the clause. 

Pandit Malaviya : While a Member is actually in the midst 
of his speech, I think, the question is even a little different from 
what it is when normally the question for closure is put. There is 
some difference. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: But no Member is now speaking. 

Pandit Malaviya : This is a matter of sufficient importance. You 
will find that those who want to speak have not spoken on this 
point at all. For instance, I have not spoken a word on this point. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Hon. members must remember this point — 
and it has also been referred to by the Hon. Law Minister — that it 
is not as if every Member who wants to speak on an amendment 
or a motion, should be given an opportunity. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : But those who have given 
amendments ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Then every Hon. Member will submit an 
amendment so that he may be allowed to speak. That cannot be the 
criterion. The Chair can be expected to weigh the pros and cons and 
come to the conclusion whether there has been sufficient debate or 
not on a particular view-point. It may be that the particular Hon. 
Member who has tabled the amendment has not pressed it; but 
some other Hon. Member may have done it, perhaps much more 
eloquently and forcibly. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: No, sir. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : It is a question to be judged by a third 
person, and I feel that there has been sufficient discussion over 
this matter. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : The points raised in these 
amendments are different. It is a quite different matter if the same 
type of amendments are discussed together. But there are particular 
aspects of these amendments which have not been pressed and those 
aspects must be considered. That is one submission as this. We are 
to decide here and now and once and for all, that texts, customs and 
usages will be given the go-by. Therefore, the importance of this clause 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1304 


1304 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

is far more than that of any other that you might discuss in the whole 
of this Bill. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : Now that this point has been raised. I would 
like to ask the Hon. Law Minister whether in view of what has been 
said, it is possible to use the word “ inconsistent” in both the parts. 

Dr. Ambedkar : That is another matter. I do not propose to make 
the change and if you will give me a chance. I will explain why. 

Pandit Malaviya : Sir, now that the Leader of the House is here, 
can we make an appeal to him ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: No. I feel that there has been sufficient 
discussion. 

The question is : 

“That the question be now put.” 

The House divided : Ayes, 63 : Noes, 34. 


Division No. 3. 

Ayes 

12-54 p.m. 

Alagesan, Shri 

Das, Shri B. K. 

Guha, Shri G. S. 

Ambedkar, Dr. 

Das, Shri Ram Dhani 

Hasan, Shri M. A. 

Ansari, Shri 

Devi Singh, 

Dr. Hazarika, Shri J. N. 

Baldev Singh, Sardar 

Durgabai, Shrimati 

Hazarika, Shri M. 

Barman, Shri 

Gadgil, Shri 

Himatsinghji, Major- 

Bharati, Shri 

Ghalib, Shri 

General. 

Borooah, Shri 

Gandhi, Shri Feroz 

Iyyunni, Shri 

Brajeshwar Prasad, Shri 

Ghose, Shri S. M. 

Jagjivan Ram, Shri 

Chaudhuri, Shrimati 

Ghule, Shri 

Jain, Shri A. P. 

Kaimala. 

Gopalaswami, Shri 

Jajoo, Shri 

Jangde, Shri 

Moidu Moulavi 

Satish Chandra, Shri 

Jayashri, Shrimati 

Nehru, Shri Jawaharlal 

Sharma, Pandit 

Kanaka Sabai, Shri 

Obaidullah, Shri 

Chandra. 

Kesar, Dr. 

Pant, Shri D. D. 

Shi Charan Lai, Shri 

Krishnamachari, Shri 

Pillay, Shri Shivan 

Shukla, Shri S, N. 

T. T. 

Poonacha, Shri 

Sidhva Shri 

Kunzru, Pandit 

Pustake, Shri 

Subbiah, Shri 

Lakshmanan, Shri 
Mirza, Shri 

Raj Bahadur, Shri 

Subramaniam, Dr. V. 
Venkataraman, Shri 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1305 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1305 



NOES 


Achint Rm, Lala 

Indra Vidyavachas- 

Sahaya, Shri Shyam 

Bhargava, Pandit M. B. 

pathi Shri 

nandan 

Bhargava, Pandit 

Jhunjhunwala, Shri 

Shah, Prof. K. T. 

Thakur Das. 

Maitra, Pandit 

Sharma Pandit 

Bhatt, Shri 

Malaviya, Pandit 

Balkrishna. 

Chandrika Ram, Shri 

Man, Sardar B. S. 

Shukla, Shri A. C. 

Das, Shri Nandkishore 

Naziruddin Ahmad, Shri 

Singh, Capt. A. P. 

Das, Shri Sarangdhar 

Oraon, Shri 

Snatak, Shri N. 

Das, Shri S. N. 

Pannalal Bansilal, Shri 

Sondhi, Shri 

Dholakia, Shri 

Ramnarayan Singh, Babu 

Tek Chand, Dr. 

Gupta, Shri V. J. 

Ranbir Singh Ch. 

Vaidya, Shri V. B. 

Hukam Singh, Sardar 

Raut, Shri 

Yashwant Rai, Prof. 


*Dr. Ambedkar: I have already explained, when I intervened earlier, 
as to what exactly is the position of custom under clause 4 which 
is the subject matter of discussion. At that time I explained that so 
far as clause 4 is concerned, it does not say that no custom shall be 
recognised. My amendment to clause 4 is “Save as otherwise expressely 
provided in this Code”, which means that if Parliament agrees to save 
any particular custom from the operation of any particular clause it is 
still open to Parliament to do so. Therefore, it is quite wrong on the 
part of Members of Parliament who have dilated on the question of 
custom to suggest that this clause is so worded as not to leave any 
room or place for custom. All that has been said that this Code is trying 
to abrogate custom altogether is to my mind based upon a complete 
misunderstanding. As I have already said, it is still open to members 
of Parliament who are interested in a particular custom to raise that 
question under the appropriate clause of this Bill when it will be open 
to discussion and I shall be able to express my opinion whether I am 
in a position to accept that custom or I am not in a position to accept 
that custom. Therefore, that position is perfectly safeguarded even if 
clause 4 is passed in the form in which I have suggested it should be 
passed. 

The only other point to which I wish to make reference is the point 
made by my friend coming from one of the tribes, Mr. Theble Oragon. 
It seems to me that he has not read the provisions of clause 2 which 
this House has already passed. Sub-clause (2) of clause 2 says to what 
*P.D., Vol. XV, Part II, 22nd September 1951, pp. 3183-88. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1306 


1306 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

persons it shall not apply. To that there is a proviso. My submission 
is that in the case of persons who belong to certain tribes which are 
not altogether Hinduised completely — so that with regard to them we 
could say that the Hindu Law as such applies to them in the same 
way as it applies to those who are in fact and in law, de jure and de 
facto, Hindus — it is only those parts of the Hindu Law which they 
have adopted that will be regarded as applicable to them and not the 
whole of the Code. Consequently there need be no fear in the minds of 
members of those communities which are still in a tribal condition and 
which follow different ways and different modes and different laws with 
regard to their marriage and divorce. They are still safeguarded except 
that if it is proved that they have adopted any particular part of the 
Hindu Law, it is only to that extent that they will be governed by this 
Code and not otherwise. My submission is that we have taken every 
precaution by adding the proviso to sub-clause (2) not to impose the 
whole of the Hindu Law which will be enacted in Part II upon them. 
They have still the freedom to go their way except to the extent which 
has been proivded in this proviso. 

One other point to which I would like to make a passing reference is 
the point made by my friend Dr. Pande and my friend Mr. T. N. Singh. 
They have said, I believe in almost uneqivocal terms, that customs 
which exist today must be safeguarded and nothing should be done to 
abrogate them. My friend, Dr. Pande, I believe, is a young graduate; 
I do not wish to say a raw but a young graduate from the University 
who probably has yet to study what the institution of Parliament means 


An hon. Member : He is a professor and a secretary. 

Dr. Ambedkar : I am very sorry, but he is still ignorant on certain 
aspects. People talk about customs in the country. Well, why have customs 
grown ? Why do the Smritikaras allow custom to continue ? I think the 
answer to that question is to be found in the fact that so far as this 
country is concerned, there never was such a tiling as a Parliament 
representing the people, coming here and legislating about their social 
relationship; there never has been such a thing at all. ( Interruption ). I 
do not know whether we are better or not. The reason, and the principal 
reason, why custom has been allowed to govern the life of the people in 
this country and in a manner much more rigorous than is to be found 
in any other part of the world 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: If I am not mistaken the common law 
in England still prevails although there has been a Parliament for ages. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1307 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1307 

Dr. Ambedkar : I know that he is much more informed on certain 
subjects than I am. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya : Dr. Ambedkar, I have never accepted 
that you are omniscient and that you have all the knowledge. It may be 
that in certain matters I may have better information 

Dr. Ambedkar: I agree that you are. My point is that in view of the 
fact 

Shri Bhatt: I would like to remind the Hon. Dr. as to wherefrom 
we got the word parishad and how the word Rajya-parishad has come 
into being. 

Dr. Ambedkar: That parishad is another thing. 

Shri Bhatt: That Parishad is another thing. 

Shri Bhatt: That was nothing but a form of Parishad. 

Dr. Ambedkar : Parishad is only a Council; it is not a Parliament, 
it has never been. What other way was left open to the people to 
regulate their life except to make their own custom, because there’ was 
no Parliament, there was no Legislature and nothing of the kind ? But 
when we have got a Parliament, the function of which is to make law, 
the question that we have to consider and very seriously consider is 
whether we are going to allow the people as such who are outside the 
Parliament to have a parallel authority to make their customary laws 
and the Parliament should have no right to interfere in them. I think, 
that is a very serious question that we have to consider. It is quite one 
thing to say that where custom have grown and they are valid customs, 
in the way in which a valid custom has been defined in clause 2 of this 
Bill, they should be retained. That is a very different question. But to 
say that nowhere custom should be altered, amended, changed is really 
to abrogate the authority of Parliament and I am very doubtful that 
any such proposition would be accepted by Parliament and that is a 
matter about which I have considerable doubt and I also go further and 
say whether Parliament could continue to be that necessary and useful 
instrument for changing the ways of life for which it has been designed, 
if the proposition which had been supported by Messrs. Pande and T. N. 
Singh was accepted, that Parliament should have no jurisdisction with 
regard to customary laws 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Will the Hon. Law Minister take a long time ? 

Dr. Ambedkar: I am just closing. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1308 


1308 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : All our points have not been dealt by 
the Hon. Minister. What becomes of those amendments which we have 
moved? Would they be expunged 

Shri T. N. Singh : On a point of personal explanation, The Hon. Law 
Minister says that I urged that each and every one of the customs should 
be scrupulously observed. I think that he did not probably understand 
my Hindi 

Dr. Ambedkar: It is quite possible. 

Shri T. N. Singh : What I said was that all customs should not be 
lightly abrogated by a law. What I want 

Dr. Ambedkar: On that point, I am in agreement. 

Shri T. N. Singh: I want to ask if the Hon. Law Minister has got any 
detailed list of the customs prevalent in the country. In the ignorance 
of all the customs of the country to say that all customs shall not be 
applicable, is not proper. That is exactly what I said. 

Dr. C. D. Pande : One thing has been said, Sir 

Dr. Ambedkar: You can come to my room and say that. 

Dr. C. D. Pande : Dr. Ambedkar has said this in Parliament and I 
wish it should be clarified in Parliament. I did not say that Parliament 
had no authority to make laws for the customary things. I appealed to 
Parliament not to touch their laws. That is a quite different position 
than what the Law Minister makes out. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I shall put the clause and the amendments 
in this order. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: Before you put them, Sir I submit it is 
1-15 already. As I said, this is a very vital clause where the texts, customs 
and usages are being abrogated. Therefore, we desire to divide on the 
amendments that have been moved. It will take a long time. Therefore, 
I submit that the actual motion may be put on another day whatever it. 

Some hon. Members : Yes, yes. 

Some hon. Members : No, no. 

Dr. Ambedkar: It will not take more than five minutes. 

Some hon. Members : No, no. 

Capt. A. P. Singh : There are so many amendments ; it will take four 
hours (. Interruption ). 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Order, order. What is going to be gained 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1309 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1309 

Shri Sondhi (Punjab) : There may be division, Sir. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad : We will ask for division at every stage. 
We want to go by justice and not by arbitrary rules. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Hon. Member may be certain that justice 
will be rendered. But, the question is, the House had accepted the closure; 
the debate is over; the Hon. Law Minister has replied. 

Pandit Malaviya: The House would have accepted the closure if you 
had put it five minutes after the debate began. It is the tyranny of the 
majority that is being forced on us ( Interruption ). 

Shrimati Durgabai (Madras): It is the tyranny of the minority over 
the majority : not the tyranny of the majority. 

Shri Naziruddin Ahmad: Tyranny of women. 

The Minister of State for Transport and Railways (Shri 
Santhanam): The hon. Member should withdraw his word ; I think it 
is contempt of Parliament. 

Some Hon. Members : No, no, no contempt. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Let us not be too sentimental over these 
matters. After all, Parliament has to go by language and no doubt, it 
must be moderate. There are in all about eleven amendments. 

Shri Syamnandan Sahaya: It will take an hour at least. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : In view of what has happened, I thought we 
could get through these amendments quickly. 

Some hon. Members: No, no. 

The House then adjourned till half Past Eight of the Clock on Monday, 
the 24th September, 1951. 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 1310 

1310 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

HINDU CODE — contd. 

Clause 4. — ( Overriding effect of Code ). 

*The Minister of Law (Dr. Ambedkar): May I submit, Sir, that 
my motion with respect to clause 4 of the Hindu Code, which was held 
over, may be put and then the other business may be taken up ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The Hon. Minister wants preference to be 
given to that Bill with respect to that part of it. The other day the 
discussion and reply on the clause was over, but just as I was about to 
put it to the House Hon. Members said it might take a long time and 
as it was 1-15 p.m. we had to adjourn. We will now finish it. 

I will now put the amendment of Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava. 

The question is : 

That for clause 4, the following be substituted: 

“4. Any text rule or interpretation of Hindu Law or any customary 
usage in force immediately before the commencement of this Code shall 
have effect with respect to any of the matters not dealt with in this 
Code.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: Now we come to amendment No. 449. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava (Punjab): I beg to withdraw it. The 
amendment was, by leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The question is : 

That in the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar, in part 
(a) of the proposed clause 4, the words “or any custom or usage” be 
omitted. 

The motion was negatived 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

That in the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar, in the 
proposed new clause 4, — 

(i) in part (a), after the words “dealt with in this Code” the words 
“after ten years from the commencement of this code” be inserted ; and 

(ii) after part (b) the following Explanation be added : 

“Explanation. — Notwithstanding anything contained in subsection (a), 
for a period of ten years from the commencement of this Code, any text, 
rule or any custom or usage in force, shall have effect.” 


P.D., Vol. XV, Part II 25th September 1951, pp. 3278-3301 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1311 


DR. AMBEDKAR AND THE HINDU CODE BILL 1311 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is: 

That in the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar, 
in part (a) of the proposed clause 4, after the words ‘this Code”, 
where they occur for the second time, the words “in so far as it is 
inconsistent with any of the provisions contained in this code” be 
inserted. The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : We pass on to the next amendment now. 
The question is : 

That in the amendment proposed by the Hon. Dr. Ambedkar, to 
the proposed clause 4, the following proviso be added : 

“Provided that this Code shall not override such existing usage, 
custom and law as form part of the distinct culture of any section of 
the people to whom this Code applies.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The next amendment is 380. The question 
is : 

That for clause 4, the following be substituted : 

“4. All texts, rules or interpretations of Hindu Law or all customs and 
usages and all other law in force immediately before the commencement 
of this Act, in so far as they may be inconsistent with this Act, shall, 
to the extent of the inconsistency, cease to have effect.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is: 

That for clause 4, the following be substituted : 

“4. All texts relating to, and all rules of interpretation of Hindu 
Law in the sacred books or in judicial pronouncement of superior 
courts in India or of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council or 
in the text books and commentaries of learned writers and authors or 
otherwise, and all customs and usages in force immediately before the 
commencement of this Code, in so far as they are inconsistent with 
this code, shall, to the extent of the inconsistency, cease to have effect.” 

The motion was negatived. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The next one is 420. 

Pandit Thakur Das Bhargava : I beg to, withdraw it. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1312 


1312 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The amendment was, be leave, withdrawn. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The amendment No. 129 by Sardar hukam 
Singh is barred. Now 130. 

The question is : 

That to clause 4, the following proviso be added : 

“Provided, however, that this Code shall not override any text, rule or 
interpretation of Hindu Law, or any custom or usage or any other law in 
force immediately prior to the commencement of this Code which has the 
sanction of Hindu religion or any other religion to the followers of which 
religion or religions this Code will apply : 

Provided further that this Code shall not override such existing text, 
rule or interpretation of Hindu Law, or any custom or usage or any other 
law in force which has sanction fo morality behind it.” 

The motion was negative. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : I shall now put Dr. ambedkar’s amendment No. 6. 

The question is : 

for clause 4, substitute : 

“4. Overriding effect of Code, — Save as otherwise expressly provided 
in this Code : — 

(a) any text, rule or interpretation of Hindu Law or any custom 
or usage in force immediately before the commencement of this Code 
shall cease to have effect with respect to any of the matters dealt with 
in this Code ; and 

(b) any other law in force immediately before the commencement of 
this Code shall cease to have effect, in so far as it is inconsistent with 
any of the provisions contained in this Code.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The question is : 

“That clause 4, as amended, stand part of the bill.” 

The motion was adopted. 

Clause 4, as amended, was added to the Bill. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker: The House will now proceed with other legislative 
business. 

Pandit Maitra (West Bengal): What about the further clauses ? 

Mr. Deputy Speaker : The other business is on the order paper. After 
that is disposed of, this will be taken up. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1313 


Annexures 

and 

Index 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1314 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1315 


Annexure I 


Statement 

BY 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar 

in Parliament in explanation of his resignation 
from the Cabinet 


New Delhi, 
10th October 1951 


(Reprinted from a copy issued to the Press by Dr. Ambedkar found 
in Ambedkar papers received from the Bombay High Court by the 
Government of Maharashtra. Dr. Ambedkar was not allowed to present 
his statement in the Lok Sabha by the Speaker. He, therefore, quit 
the House and distributed the copies of statement to the members of 
Parliament and the Press — Ed.) 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1316 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1317 


Statement 

by 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar in explanation of his 

RESIGNATION 

The House I am sure knows, unofficially if not officially, that 
I have ceased to be a Member of the Cabinet. I tendered my 
resignation on Thursday the 27th September to the Prime Minister 
and asked him to relieve me immediately. The Prime Minister was 
good enough to accept the same on the very next day. If I have 
continued to be a Minister after Friday the 28th, it is because the 
Prime Minister had requested me to continue till the end of the 
Session — a request to which I was, in obedience to constitutional 
convention, bound to assent. 

Our Rules of Procedure permit a Minister who has resigned 
his office, to make a personal statement in explanation of his 
resignation. Many members of Cabinet have resigned during my 
tenure of office. There has been however no uniform practice in the 
matter of Ministers who have resigned making a statement. Some 
have gone without making a statement and others have gone after 
making a statement. For a few days I was hesitant what course 
to follow. After taking all circumstances into consideration I came 
to the conclusion that the making of a statement was not merely 
necessary, but it was a duty which a member who has resigned 
owes to the House. 

The House has no opportunity to know how the Cabinet works 
from within, whether there is harmony or whether there is a conflict, 
for the simple reason that there is a joint responsibility under 
which a member who is in a minority is not entitled to disclose his 
differences. Consequently the House continues to think that there 
is no conflict among members of Cabinet even when as a matter of 
fact a conflict exists. It is, therefore, a duty of a retiring Minister 
to make a statement informing the House why he wants to go and 
why he is not able to continue to take further joint responsibility. 

Secondly, if a Minister goes without making a statement, 
people may suspect that there is something wrong with the 
conduct of the Minister, either in his public capacity or in 
his private capacity. No Minister should, I think, leave room 
for such suspicion and the only safe way out is a statement. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1318 


1318 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Thirdly we have our newspapers. They have their age-old bias in 
favour of some and against others. Their judgements are seldom based 
on merits. Wherever they find an empty space, they are prone to fill 
the vacuum by supplying grounds for resignation which are not the 
real grounds but which put those whom they favour in a better light 
and those not in their favour in a bad light. Some such thing I see 
has happened even in my case. 

It is for these reasons that I decided to make a statement before 
going out. 

It is now 4 years, 1 month and 26 days since I was called by the 
Prime Minister to accept the office of Law Minister in his Cabinet. 
The offer came as a great surprise to me. I was in the opposite camp 
and had already been condemned as unworthy of association when 
the interim Government was formed in August 1946. I was left to 
speculate as to what could have happened to bring about this change 
in the attitude of the Prime Minister. I had my doubts. I did not know 
how I could carry on with those who had never been my friends. I 
had doubts as to whether I could, as a Law Member, maintain the 
standard of legal knowledge and acumen which had been maintained 
by those who had preceded me as Law Ministers of the Government 
of India. But I kept my doubts at rest and accepted the offer of the 
Prime Minister on the ground that I should not deny my cooperation 
when it was asked for in the building up of our nation. The quality 
of my performance as a Member of the Cabinet and as Law Minister, 
I must leave it to others to judge. 

I will now refer to matters which have led me to sever my connection 
with my colleagues. The urge to go has been growing from long past 
due to variety of reasons. 

I will first refer to matters purely of a personal character and 
which are the least of the grounds which have led me to tender 
my resignation. As a result of my being a member of the Viceroy’s 
Executive Council, I knew the Law Ministry to be administratively 
of no importance. It gave no opportunity for shaping the policy of 
the Government of India. We used to call it an empty soap box 
only good for old lawyers to play with. When the Prime Minister 
made me the offer, I told him that besides being a lawyer by my 
education and experience, I was competent to run any administrative 
Department and that in the old Viceroy’s Executive Council I held 
two administrative portfolios, that of Labour and C.P.W.D., where 
a great deal of planning projects were dealt with by me and would 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1319 


ANNEXURE I 1319 

like to have some administrative portfolio. The Prime Minister agreed 
and said he would give me in addition to Law the Planning Department 
which, he said, he was intending to create. Unfortunately the Planning 
Department came very late in the day and when it did come I was 
left out. During my time, there have been many transfers of portfolios 
from one Minister to another. I thought I might be considered for any 
one of them. But I have always been left out of consideration. Many 
Ministers have been given two or three portfolios so that they have 
been overburdened. Others like me have been wanting more work. I 
have not even been considered for holding a portfolio temporarily when 
a Minister in charge has gone abroad for a few days. It is difficult 
to understand what is the principle underlying the distribution of 
Government work among Ministers which the Prime Minister follows. 
Is it capacity ? Is it trust ? Is it friendship ? Is it pliability ? I was not 
even appointed to be a member of main Committees of the Cabinet 
such as the Foreign Affairs Committee or the Defence Committee. 
When the Economic Affairs Committee was formed, I expected, in 
view of the fact that I was primarily a student of Economics and 
Finance, to be appointed to this Committee. But I was left out. I 
was appointed to it by the Cabinet, when the Prime Minister had 
gone to England. But when he returned, in one of his many essays 
in the reconstruction of the Cabinet, he left me out. In a subsequent 
reconstruction my name was added to the Committee, but that was 
as a result of my protest. 

The Prime Minister, I am sure, will agree that I have never 
complained to him in this connection. I have never been a party to 
the game of power politics inside the Cabinet or the game of snatching 
portfolios which goes on when there is a vacancy. I believe in service, 
service in the post which the Prime Minister, who as the head of the 
Cabinet, thought fit to assign to me. It would have, however, been quite 
unhuman for me not to have felt that a wrong was being done to me. 

I will now refer to another matter that had made me dissatisfied 
with the Government. It relates to the treatment accorded to the 
Backward Classes and the Scheduled Castes. I was very sorry that 
the Constitution did not embody any safeguards for the Backward 
Classes. It was left to be done by the Executive Government on 
the basis of the recommendations of a Commission to be appointed 
by the President. More than a year has elapsed since we passed 
the Constitution. But the Government has not even thought of 
appointing the Commission. The year 1946 during which I was out 


z:\ambedkar\vol-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 1320 

1320 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of office, was a year of great anxiety to me and to the leading members 
of the Scheduled Castes. The British had resiled from the commitments 
they had made in the matter of constitutional safeguards for the 
Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled Castes had no knowing as to 
what the Constituent Assembly would do in that behalf. In this period 
of anxiety I had prepared a report* on the condition of the Scheduled 
Castes for submission to the United Nations. But I did not submit it. 
I felt that it would be better to wait until the Constituent Assembly 
and the future Parliament was given a chance to deal with the matter. 
The provisions made in the Constitution for safeguarding the position 
of the Scheduled Castes were not to my satisfaction. However, I 
accepted them for what they were worth, hoping that the Government 
will show some determination to make them effective. What is the 
position of the Scheduled Castes to-day ? So far as I see, it is the 
same as before. The same old tyranny, the same old oppression, the 
same old discrimination which existed before, exists now, and perhaps 
in a worst form. I can refer to hundreds of cases where people from 
the Scheduled Castes round about Delhi and adjoining places have 
come to me with their tales of woes against the Caste Hindus and 
against the Police who have refused to register their complaints and 
render them any help. I have been wondering whether there is any 
other parallel in the world to the condition of the Scheduled Castes 
in India. I cannot find any. And yet why is no relief granted to the 
Scheduled Castes ? Compare the concern the Government shows over 
safeguarding the Muslims. The Prime Minister’s whole time and 
attention is devoted for the protection of the Muslims. I yield to none, 
not even to the Prime Minister, in my desire to give the Muslims of 
India the utmost protection wherever and whenever they stand in need 
of it. But what I want to know is, are the Muslims the only people 
who need protection? Are the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled Tribes 
and the Indian Christians not in need of protection ? What concern 
has he shown for these communities ? So far as I know, none and yet 
these are the communities which need far more care and attention 
than the Muslims. 

I could not contain within myself the indignation I have felt over 
the neglect of the Scheduled Castes by the Government and on 
one occasion I gave vent to my feelings at a public meeting of the 
Scheduled Castes. A question was asked, from the Hon’ble the Home 
Minister, whether my charge that the Scheduled Castes had not 


*Editor regrets his inability to trace out this report and will welcome any assistance in 
this regard — Ed. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1321 


ANNEXURE I 1321 

benefitted by the rule which guaranteed to them 1214 per cent 
representation was true. In answer to the question the Hon’ble the 
Home Minister was pleased to say that my charge was baseless. 
Subsequently for some reason — it may be for satisfying the qualms 
of his conscience — he, I am informed, sent round a circular to 
the various Departments of the Government of India asking 
them to report how many Scheduled Caste candidates had been 
recently recruited in Government service. I am informed that most 
Departments said in reply ‘NIL’ or nearly nil. If my information is 
correct, I need make no commentary on the answer given by the 
Hon’ble the Home Minister. 

From my early childhood I have dedicated myself to the upliftment 
of the Scheduled Castes among whom I was born. It is not that 
there were no temptations in my way. If I had considered my own 
interests, I could have been anything I wanted to be and if I had 
joined the Congress I would have reached to the highest place in 
that organization. But as I said, I had dedicated myself to the 
upliftment of the Scheduled Castes and I have followed the adage 
which says that it is better to be narrow-minded if you wish to be 
enthusiastic about a cause which you wish to accomplish. You can 
therefore, well imagine what pain it has caused me to see that the 
cause of the Scheduled Castes has been relegated to the limbo of 
nothing. 

The third matter which has given me cause, not merely for 
dissatisfaction but for actual anxiety and even worry, is the foreign 
policy of the country. Any one, who has followed the course of our 
foreign policy and along with it the attitude of other countries 
towards India, could not fail to realize the sudden change that has 
taken place in their attitude towards us. On 15th of August 1947 
when we began our life as an independent country, there was no 
country which wished us ill. Every country in the world was our 
friend. Today, after four years, all our friends have deserted us. We 
have no friends left. We have alienated ourselves. We are pursuing 
a lonely furrow with no one even to second our resolutions in the 
U.N.O. When I think of our foreign policy, I am reminded of what 
Bismark and Bernard Shaw have said. Bismark has said that 
“politics is not a game of realizing the ideal. Politics is the game 
of the possible.” Bernard Shaw not very long ago said that good 
ideals are good but one must not forget that it is often dangerous 
to be too good. Our foreign policy is in complete opposition to these 
words of wisdom uttered by two of the world’s greatest men. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1322 


1322 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

How dangerous it has been to us this policy of doing the impossible 
and of being too good is illustrated by the great drain on our 
resources made by our military expenditure, by the difficulty of 
getting food for our starving millions and by difficulty of getting 
aid for the industrialization of our country. 

Out of 350 crores of rupees of revenue we raise annually, we 
spend about Rs. 180 crores of rupees on the Army. It is a colossal 
expenditure which has hardly any parallel. This colossal expenditure 
is the direct result of our foreign policy. We have to foot the whole 
of our Bill for our defence ourselves because we have no friends on 
which we can depend for help in any emergency that may arise. I 
have been wondering whether this is the right sort of foreign policy. 

Our quarrel with Pakistan is a part of our foreign policy about 
which I feel deeply dissatisfied. There are two grounds which have 
disturbed our relations with Pakistan — one is Kashmir and the other 
is the condition of our people in East Bengal. I felt that we should 
be more deeply concerned with East Bengal where the condition 
of our people seems from all the newspapers intolerable than with 
Kashmir. Notwithstanding this we have been staking our all on the 
Kashmir issue. Even then I feel that we have been fighting on an 
unreal issue. The issue on which we are fighting most of the time 
is, who is in the right and who is in the worng. The real issue to 
my mind is not who is in the right but what is right. Taking that 
to be the main question, my view has always been that the right 
solution is to partition Kashmir. Give the Hindu and Buddhist 
part to India and the Muslim part to Pakistan as we did in the 
case of India. We are really not concerned with the Muslim part 
of Kashmir. It is a matter between the Muslims of Kashmir and 
Pakistan. They may decide the issue as they like. Or if you like, 
divide it into three parts; the Cease-fire zone, the Valley and the 
Jammu-Ladhak Region and have a plebiscite only in the Valley. 
What I am afraid of is that in the proposed plebiscite, which is 
to be an overall plebiscite, the Hindus and Buddhists of Kashmir 
are likely to be dragged into Pakistan against their wishes and 
we may have to face the same problems as we are facing today in 
East Bengal. 

I will now refer to the Fourth matter which has a good deal 
to do with my resignation. The Cabinet has become a merely 
recording and registration office of decisions already arrived at by 
Committees. As I have said, the Cabinet now works by Committees. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1323 


ANNEXURE I 1323 

There is a Defence Committee. There is a Foreign Committee. All 
important matters relating to Foreign affairs are dealt with by it. All 
matters relating to Defence are disposed of by the Defence Committee. 
The same members of the Cabinet are appointed by them. I am not a 
member of either of these Committees. They work behind an iron curtain. 
Others who are not members have only to take joint responsibility 
without any opportunity of taking part in the shaping of policy. This is 
an impossible position. 

I will now deal with a matter which has led me finally to come to the 
decision that I should resign. It is the treatment which was accorded 
to the Hindu Code. The Bill was introduced in this House on the 11th 
April 1947. After a life of four years, it was killed and died unwept 
and unsung, after 4 clauses of it were passed. While it was before the 
House, it lived by fits and starts. For full one year the Government did 
not feel it necessary to refer it to a Select Committee. It was referred 
to the Select Committee on 9th April 1948. The Report was presented 
to the House on 12th August 1948. The motion for the consideration of 
the Report was made by me on 31st August 1948. It was merely for 
making the motion that the Bill was kept on the Agenda. The discussion 
of the motion was not allowed to take place until the February Session 
of the year 1949. Even then it was not allowed to have a continuous 
discussion. It was distributed over 10 months, 4 days in February, 1 
day in March and 2 days in April 1949. After this, one day was given 
to the Bill in December 1949, namely the 19th December on which day 
the House adopted my motion that the Bill as reported by the Select 
Committee be taken into consideration. No time was given to the Bill 
in the year 1950. Next time the Bill came before the House was on 5th 
February 1951 when the clause by clause consideration of the Bill was 
taken. Only three days 5th, 6th and 7th of February were given to the 
Bill and left there to rot. 

This being the last Session of the present Parliament, Cabinet had to 
consider whether the Hindu Code Bill should be got through before this 
Parliament ended or whether it should be left over to the new Parliament. 
The Cabinet unanimously decided that it should be put through in this 
Parliament. So the Bill was put on the Agenda and was taken up on the 
17th September 1951 for further clause by clause consideration. As the 
discussion was going on the Prime Minister put forth a new proposal, 
namely, that the Bill as a whole may not be got through within the time 
available and that it was desirable to get a part of it enacted into law rather 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1324 


1324 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

than allow the whole of it to go to waste. It was a great wrentch to me. 
But I agreed, for, as the proverb says “it is better to save a part when 
the whole is likely to be lost”. The Prime Minister suggested that we 
should select the Marriage and Divorce part. The Bill in its truncated 
‘form went on. After two or three days of discussion of the Bill the Prime 
Minister came up with another proposal. This time his proposal was to 
drop the whole Bill even the Marriage and Divorce portion. This came 
to me as a great shock — a bolt from the blue. I was stunned and could 
not say anything. I am not prepared to accept that the dropping of this 
truncated Bill was due to want of time. I am sure that the truncated 
Bill was dropped because other and more powerful members of the 
Cabinet wanted precedence for their Bills. I am unable to understand 
how the Benaras and Aligarh University Bills, how the Press Bill could 
have been given precedence over the Hindu Code even in its attenuated 
form ? It is not that there was no law on the Statute Book to govern 
the Aligarh University or the Benaras University. It is not that these 
Universities would have gone to wreck and ruins if the Bills had not 
been passed in this session. It is not that the Press Bill was urgent. 
There is already a law on the Statute Book and the Bill could have 
waited. I got the impression that the Prime Minister, although sincere, 
had not the earnestness and determination required to get the Hindu 
Code Bill through. 

In regard to this Bill I have been made to go through the greatest 
mental torture. The aid of Party Machinery was denied to me. The 
Prime Minister gave freedom of Vote, an unusual thing in the history 
of the Party. I did not mind it. But I expected two things. I expected 
a party whip as to time limit on speeches and instruction to the Chief 
Whip to move closure when sufficient debate had taken place. A whip 
on time limit on speeches would have got the Bill through. When 
freedom of voting was given there could have been no objection to have 
given a whip for time limit on speeches. But such a whip was never 
issued. The conduct of the Minister for Parliamentary Affairs, who is 
also the Chief Whip of the Party in connection with the Hindu Code, to 
say the least, has been most extraordinary. He has been the deadliest 
opponent of the Code and has never been present to aid me by moving 
a closure motion. For days and hours filibustering has gone on a single 
clause. But the Chief Whip, whose duty it is to economise Government 
time and push on Government Business, has been systematically 
absent when the Hindu Code has been under consideration in the 
House. I have never seen a case of a Chief Whip so disloyal to the 
Prime Minister and a Prime Minister so loyal to a disloyal Whip. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1325 


ANNEXURE I 1325 

Notwithstanding this unconstitutional behaviour, the Chief Whip is 
really a darling of the Prime Minister. For notwithstanding his disloyalty 
he got a promotion in the Party organization. It is impossible to carry 
on in such circumstances. 

It has been said that the Bill had to be dropped because the 
opposition was strong. How strong was the opposition ? This Bill has 
been discussed several times in the Party and was carried to division 
by the opponents. Every time the opponents were routed. The last time 
when the Bill was taken up in the Party Meeting, out of 120 only 20 
were found to be against it. When the Bill was taken in the Party 
for discussion, 44 clauses were passed in about 314 hours time. This 
shows how much opposition there was to the Bill within the Party. 
In the House itself there have been divisions on three clauses of the 
Bill — 2, 3 and 4. Every time there has been a overwhelming majority 
in favour even on clause 4 which is the soul of the Hindu Code. 

I was therefore, quite unable to accept the Prime Minister’s decision 
to abandon the Bill on the ground of time. I have been obliged to give 
this elaborate explanation for my resignation because some people have 
suggested that I am going because of my illness. I wish to repudiate 
any such suggestion. I am the last man to abandon my duty because 
of illness. 

It may be said that my resignation is out of time and that if I 
was dissatisfied with the Foreign Policy of the Government and the 
treatment accorded to Backward Classes and the Scheduled Castes I 
should have gone earlier. The charge may sound as true. But I had 
reasons which held me back. In the first place, most of the time I have 
been a member of the Cabinet, I have been busy with the framing of 
the Constitution. It absorbed all my attention till 26th January 1950 
and thereafter I was concerned with the Peoples’ Representation Bill 
and the Delimitation Orders. I had hardly any time to attend to our 
Foreign Affairs. I did not think it right to go away leaving this work 
unfinished. 

In the second place, I thought it necessary to stay on, for the 
sake of the Hindu Code. In the opinion of some it may be wrong 
for me to have held on for the sake of the Hindu Code. I took a 
different view. The Hindu Code was the greatest social reform 
measure ever undertaken by the Legislature in this country. No law 
passed by the Indian Legislature in the past or likely to be passed 
in the future can be compared to it in point of its significance. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1326 


1326 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

To leave inequality between class and class, between sex and sex 
which is the soul of Hindu Society untouched and to go on passing 
legislation relating to economic problems is to make a farce of our 
Constitution and to build a palace on a dung heap. This is the 
significance I attached to the Hindu Code. It is for its sake that I 
stayed on notwithstanding my differences. So if I have committed 
a wrong it is in the hope of doing some good. Had I no ground 
for such a hope, for overcoming the obstructionist tactics of the 
opponents ? I would like in this connection to refer only to three 
of the statements made by the Prime Minister on the floor of the 
House. 

On 28th November, 1949 the Prime Minister gave the following 
assurance. He said : 

“What is more, the Government is committed to this thing (Hindu 
Code). It is going through with it.” 

* * * * 

“Government would proceed with that. It is for this House to 
accept a measure, but if a Government takes an important measure 
and the House rejects it, the House rejects that Government and 
the Government goes and another Government comes in its place. 

It should be clearly understood that this is one of the important 
measures to which the Government attaches importance and on which 
it will stand or fall.” 

Again on 19th December 1949, the Prime Minister said : 

“I do not wish the House to think in the slightest degree that we 
consider that this Hindu Code Bill is not of importance, because we 
do attach the greatest importance to it, as I said, not because of any 
particular clause or anything, but because of the basic approach to 
this vast problem in problems, economic and social. We have achieved 
political freedom in this country, political independence. That is a 
stage in the journey, and there are other stages, economic, social 
and other and if society is to advance, there must be this integrated 
advance on all fronts.” 

On the 26th September 1951 the Prime Minister said : 

“It is not necessary for me to assure the House of the desire 
of Government to proceed with this measure in so far as we can 
proceed with it within possibilities, and so far as we are concerned 
we consider this matter as adjourned till such time as the next 
opportunity — I hope it will be in this Parliament — offers itself. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1327 


ANNEXURE I 1327 

This was after the Prime Minister had announced the dropping of the 
Bill. Who could not have believed in these pronouncements of the Prime 
Minster ? If I did not think that there could be a difference between the 
promises and performances of the Prime Minister the fault is certainly not 
mine. My exit from the Cabinet may not be a matter of much concern to 
anybody in this country. But I must be true to myself and that I can be 
only by going out. Before I do so I wish to thank my colleagues for the 
kindness and courtesy they have shown to me during my membership of 
the Cabinet. While I am not resigning my membership of Parliament I 
also wish to express my gratitude to Members of Parliament for having 
shown great tolerance towards me. 


New Delhi, 

10th October 1951 B. R. AMBEDKAR 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1328 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1329 


Annexure II 

Government of India, through its Publication Division had 
published a book by name ‘Hindu Code Bill and its purpose’ 
in Hindi language during the 50s. This book contained two 
speeches of Dr. Ambedkar delivered in the Constituent 
Assembly, Press reports of the speeches against the Code 
by Shankaracharya of Jyotirmath and Swami Karpatriji; 
and the articles supporting the Code by an eminent Vedic 
Scholar Pandit Dharmadeo Vidyavachaspati. The book also 
included text of the Hindu Code along with the press-reports 
supporting it. 

It has been felt by the Committee Members that the 
inclusion of articles by Dharmadeo Vidyavachaspati from 
the Hindi book in the present volume would be of utmost 
help to the reader to understand how the reform introduced 
by Dr. Ambedkar had the support of the Hindu scriptures 
also. I hope students and scholars alike would benefit by 
these articles. 


Editor 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1330 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1331 


Annexure II 

(%^ rPIs fRR X 1T PdRK-1 ) 

cftf T 37 cF f 

R. snf^R jclillciTRRTlct 

[ RT R-lcS IdSI-^ xf. &j4dd IqsJIcn-oH-Mlrl RR sft% % ayPcKIdT xf 
is fRRcfT 'Jtlcei RR 3rfc4ctiiyi rrxt ^Rt RR 3TTxrf cfr yi-ofld SjiMch TFRT cfr 
3frr ar^rsiR Rtar ti Pm^h f3Hf ^3RcFf rrt ^rivii Pd^i 

cfr ■ggf^gr lg*41 ^Iddi “afT STR^T” xf ychlR'Id ^ Sjf PjH-i 4 RdCf% yixsfld 
^-Hpd’yf , ^aft T1RT yiiW) xfr yniui TTg' <scg;<<j| d=h< Pg-d faRT cfr Pd PdR 

faaHt RTT RTTHfrT Id^-dd P=hdi 't' I Id-dK^ilcd modif xfr fcRTT “r)T STRfR” 

Rif '(-dl^ld % xjr RtTsT nidi XJRT TJR: ychil^id Rif RT Tiff Is ] 

RRR TRRiK X# fRRR-RpRR dlddlR RT. R^dRiT £TR RTCRtR TTR 

rr^ a xnMRnW 4' r4r faar’ Rf faaR: aft str^rr 1%rt rt 

TRT t I 4' Rf RXfT RTfR farM R*4dd RT ■RRT f faa4 XJTRT RTR 

RR RR1RTT RRT % R?p 4 Rtf RRT RRfrfd RR Rcfdld RT^RI R RTRR 4' Rt 
^R RTR Rif RTR RR ^RT RISdl \ far R %R[ Rifa faR RTT Rdf^l R RR4 rT 

R# 0 } IR^' 3RfaT WTRRf aft 3RRRRRTRT t, T^RT 4t 4a fRRR t fRR^ XJff 

RT? %R RR ^TR iffR T? fRi fR faR Ri RXR'R R 3TRTR RRR R^R RfaRT 

fRRTT RT TRT t I RTR: fRai fRTtaf ^ t Pd^P ?RFRj4RT fRRT Rft RRT3Tf Rpf 

RR4 RR RTRt RRR RRt RRTRT 3^ ^ ‘fR^R^ sfR RXR7fR RRR 4’’ fR RT^ 

Rpf RRTT RR RXpRTRKR RRRT R7f R?#fRR RR^ RR 3^f%fR RRrR RR T# t I R 
WT' ^RrfR RcRRTRRf 4' fRRRTR Rl4 RTRT ^ fRfRTR RTRRpR Rf 

Rt fR fRRT 4' RRJR RRTTRf RR R^ildH fRRTT t fRRRR MP<u|m R RRRT 
Rp RFg® Rl4 RR RRRT RRRRTI fRP§ R fR RRR ^R 4' RR fgTRHT RTRRT \ 
fRT RR ‘1%^ fRRf ’ X# fRRpRT RT RR^RT r 4' sffR RR^Pd RR RRT 

RRRT RT^ t, ‘f^ r 4 ’ ^ Ritf ^R Riff ffRTtR Rf 3T5TRR fRRTT RT W 

t RR fRRTRT 3TRTR t ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1332 


1332 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

fTT fnTU nff STITT 78 ff ftnai Is fni niff iff ffTFU o^ftd fTT STITT ^ fnsr 
nit ^ 3TSTfu fnrrff ’usufc'iM nn cicil ( TTT8Tn> ) ff% nri 3TfsrnnT nff 7T§fuT .* 

( 3T ) mr snf nff TSJTT T^chi if ’ $rMift I 

SUTT 81 3 ‘Tmniftch nnrf nil 3Tfi|obK TTtTT nU ’ ^i!4ch ep nNf Rd <ai 

if-ni^T nr fgr ft>4) -iiqil^iM nn Tnwrfnnr nruf ifif nraTfnnT nif TTTSicbdi 
ftvH) «<ftd nff Pf ^rU t, niT fd*d 3pft»dl' nff T5ff niT ousd nfru gl'li: 

( ni ) nj£T TT fn> <S’Hchl olusd oc><4 nff ^Ic^ft ^nT diouftiM ^ %U cUPT ^ 
fnUT T# if 3T8mT (7sT) nUTT TT fn> Tmmfnnr muf ff^ snf nif rqm -^cbi ifl 

SUTT 83 ff ftnai if- “ ft>41 dl«dftid ^ nnrf niT nTrfer ffnr fni niT 
T^ff disdRdd nil ff^ ^ TOT ff moid-Mft <ji nff''l 

J|ft ^ |cm<M ff fnsraT ^ 3TfS|cbK nff TUTlfUT ftm<Mch SUTT 61 ff ftioi 
f % TTcR fesmT TO nfn #f TO 3TfSTTOT THTTUT ?f TOUT f: 

(ni) nm fn> TO TJufcTTOT TO" ^Tfl 't'l 

( 7sT ) nm snf ■grt rmM ifl nfn nff tiPtidi TH% TOnT e^fcw fTT 
yfftcb nff SUTT 62, TOSUTT ( 3 ) ff RdOl 'I' fn> T U?U nTO nff nfn ^ TT^nf: 

(ni) nfe ousel TO fUTU ITT Ti 0 * 11 

(Tl') nfn TO fcuu snf eRt cMIM T^cbi ■!■ ^rmld I TT^T ■HlHtd ( ^<rtetri 

^ frUl^ ^ 3UTT SUTT 78 ^ f^T ^ TT^ff % fTT13T f fg> 

^ i«F e^ldd snf '^fl' 'JTT fTT TTTUT T^TFT T^ohi i| IdTHl 

dlsdldtM ^U WHHlfcioh ^TUt ( TTT^rai ) oid'l ^U 3TfsraiTT 'U ?fUT Wf|TT| 1 

"Udft ^i wu-'urwr, frr ?nrr 126 ^ %®t t % Phh fdRsid ^uaff 

TT '41ft <=6 1 TTRT ^Tt4 ^ 3Tu 4 3lf?T^R ^ ^RT fU; ^ 3TP^ 31FFT T^ 
% TTTUt 3Tf?TOR Tn TRnft t ^ (Ti) cfF ?t 4 MPw4d ^KT 3T^T 

^^ftdMl ^tt arfF^ t ^rrfti ^t^tttt ( 3 ) 3 %®t t % ^ 

^Prf -q^ft arulwcu t arsr^T snf qpioi^d ^ttt st^t swftdftl ^tt 
^T ^=uf t, TTf ^TT 'gTeTTT ^ ^ 31TTU T^ TT^U W r T- 1 frwr WffTeT ^4 
3lfWT WTTI 

sun 120 nn snfuffmfn mru um nu^u nft ntTum n#f Tnm, m nto 
sp nf^ ftnai n fur mu fn nTfe =p Tumn ufn ^ nfunf nr nm niff mf 
■qffmfn nm£ mn nnfnnnnt nu ni nunu n tf nnr if nr 3if^ 
nn nf nl ^n to ^ mf nffmfn nf q^nid nn -gnu nr nn nuf ^ 
nfr n?qro #f, urn nunft Tunm anrP fnrft nuronf nff Tnnfn nf 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1333 


ANNEXURE II 1333 

yiKI RR qfRRRT R qsl'll RR dRi 1% RT •H-dlR 3ddiRq>K 

qf^ Ri qRR ddl 'll 

3RR qSRRT qt 3qlRT f^T RT qRRt t W? t % fq^| RTfR fRRT 

^ Pl^ldiarf ^ fq*pR qft T8JT RR fRRfR RR qiT t RRT 3^' ^ l^R 

t, RRfq Rq^' Rft 3TIRRRRRTT RTf ^ TO q^RR RR?T t fRRRR R^RR 

Rt RqpT: fq^ Rtf 3fR TOf?T RR RSR qt tl 

qq fw rtrrIr qr. aq^qRq Rnfq ^ Rid4)d qT 3 rrr rt q Irrrr 
# qTR Rrq qRRTT \ % ^ fq\ RTfR rtT RcfqjR rifT A RqR^ qqsR rtT 
rfA Ri fqq qt qq dil-s fqqf Rtf qqjR qq i? fqqrt fq^qt ^ 
3Fq, rtr 2 3 qt qftRTRT qr sgqq r qtRqr ^ ^RfRR 3 ttR t qft fq^ r 
4 rt fqqrt qt qqqq Rr qqqrR rtT qR?t t, fRRtj «fte, 4 r rt fqq® r 4 qr 

RFJRTRt qRRT qtf qqq RRF)- RTRt TOfRRT <t 3# f | RTTfqRiqt RRT 3RR 

qt qq qftqmi q fq^sft Rt rfrr qt rt^ q^t ■§ i 

fRwr Ft qqq qr fqqqqR fRRiwf qt qR7 q^qrqpq qte rr 
qqqr rr qt qqqr ii fqR-fqR qqqf sftr RTfrof qr Ttfq-iwqf' ^ fRRTM fq^, 
qt qq %R-fqR qq qq t qq rrpT qft rrrrrt qqfi qqftqt q RTqqT 

fqT ^ RTT RRT^ 3^ qq fRR RR ^ IrtTR RTT^ qff qTRRT RTf RR 

RTfq qq fRR Rft RTqqf rr Irirr qkq r?rrr r 3 afq rr ^ fq^q rrrt 

qqfqq qq^R qq fqq^ qq qfqqr qqjriqt sftr RiqqRqq rr qqh si. aq^qqq 

RRT 3RR qqqi ^ fRTRTRTR fR^ff RR WRR RR^ RTf RRR t'l 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1334 


1334 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

ohls Pd<d FT PddK-2 ) 



STTTTTf 


F. iFTOTTFTFfF 


f«tf Ft® 3 ^ mdchT 3 rn=KH %ft «tt % ‘ff^ fIf fro ft 
ft^ mt, to 3rk y'^Pd ft f4hif ftft t’ wnfK fItot, ftot ftt! ft 

fFYFTTf F F<F dR fFFFF 6 )f< FTFtT FTF 7t %FP f)s IFF Ft f^FT 2 

FTTT3tf ft fFFTT ftf FTf!r4i frr ct® if it Iff® PdMdF FTTTFf ft ^5 fft® 
tort FifF 

Iff® Ft fttfIf sfrr ftrfF® ft Fttf fifI 3 fFFFr ft?I if nidld Iff® 
TOt ?=TRT 7 pTHprlRsId FTFt Ff t:- 

FT7T 7-FfF ld»dRdRad Flit ' T JTl 'ft 'did! Is Ft Idvf) Ft '3Tf R^STf it TFTTFtF 
TtfrT Ft 3T^nr fFFTf TTTOT Ft FT^TTT:- 

( 1 ) FfF FtFf F?(ft 14 ci® ^ HHd FT FTtf F?f Ft TTfrT 3T8TFT FrFt 
Fft <<adi i 

( 2 ) FfF did"! FSTt I 4 dl$ ^ HHd FTtf FTf <^R& FT MlM<d ' 3 ft 't'l 

( 3 ) FfF I4d® ^ HHd F^ 3TFTTf F^ Fit 3TR( Tjft FiT T^dii ^ 3flT FS£ 

14 F^ 3TT3J FTt FiT ^jchl 'f'l 

( 4 ) did did) F8JT F7TFT Id^lrHcb ■h*-^FST Fit chllddl ^ Fi-d'td df) 3F%I 

( 5 ) fIf FtFt f?t 3TTF7T it fttft ■hImus Fft 'f 3ftr fIf Mu^Reb fttftt 

3ftr m»xi<i cfc 3TdT4fT FtFf F^ft 3 t)ttt hw ftff (^st) ftf% Fit ftstt 
F ftl 

( 6 ) 'df I FT FT FS£ 1 6 F^ Fit 3FTJ TJTt df) di< ^ctil ^ dHdi TTTSjTFi 
Fit *4)<=hld TTH^T Fit FT TddPl 'I'l 

nfmiF FF5FST ^ft 'qfmFT 3flT c^UsUl eFFt flT STTTT 5 <?TFT W t %- 

( 1 X ®f> ) WfLCJS -H^ST ^TT 3 T 8 p 3 TF% MldchH ^tt FtF ^Mt ^ 3 flT Rm^^xH 

■^tt 5 Ftst fraT Ftnri 

(IF) Ft odldd FTTt 31F7FT FTPIT ■hImus Fit' 'FfF T(FT ^fR - 

FYT- 1 1TarTr % ■hImus FnF^ST Fit 41 hi ^ 4tFT HH^i'd 'f 3TFFT FfF % 
FtFt hIhus Fit 41hi ^ 4tHT TTfwfdTF dVl L K<- L m , id 3 hmh T^FT 

^ ^ FTF FFTF F?TF ^ FHT fl 

(F) RtRNcs; 'FFF^r FF FFT ... Ft cdPcWdl FTT FF 3TFFFT PdPl^ 'FFF^T 
FifT 'dldl t FfF FlFt % T(Fi FFT^TF % ^FTt FF ^<<31 ft, 3TFFT 
FFT^TF % 1 JT1§t FT Hdld Fit Frft FT FfF TfT ft, 3TFFT ^ did) FT^-FfF, 
■FTFT-FHtFt 3flT FTcft-FiFFT 3TFFT FT^Ff F FfFt Fit Hdild ftl 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1335 


ANNEXURE II 1335 

cucm ous 1 3f|T 2 tf d qt tl ( 3T ) 7^7TT 7775RI 

qft fqi 3TsfT3rTJJ3rT 77^137" 7377^377 't'l 

( 2 ) spfa 77277 3T£nfn TFrTirr Trcsr^TI 

(3) qrTTR 3727777 7377 77*3^71 

qqq qrqq-7i^' q qrfqq qqt TTrq^qqftqqr- qq qqq7 37d TTqfrr 
^TI%ni qT3qr tit % qTTTqtq l^cfTF t %TT tt 7T7f WK qRd qft qf t t 

37fqqqT7 qtt t fqpt qrftqr <|fe t 373 tt ¥R: TTRT THTflT qTTTT tl 377T7 
df^T 77T t'l “WTRT y kldl^dtldd : fqqq77TqT”l fc^TTlt Tqfi qqtf f 4ld<$d sfft 
PMd<$d qft sFqqf: 5 3fft 7 ttfedf qft Trfw 4H4H tfet qq fqqpT t 
qqfq 7qfq qP5W, q^hiPd qq diisift 3 afk 5 m # qpMtdi qrft M 
t q^ ql{|pj|ch Tpsff q eft •Hpq'ddl qq sfK dt 37fqq7 TTqftq qq?t fir qPTT qft 
d^qfl ^iP< t dt fqqrq qft qfqq qnr qqr t th ^rf^wff d qr| 7«7F7f qr 
tdt tt qqT ti qffq d qwTqrd qft qqq fqqq qq 7 ti qfq 3 td; 

5 ttferr ^ w qr qid^d td Pqd^d qft 3rqqr: 5 td 7 dtfdqt' qft dteT 
qq qt 37fdqr qnTdtq ttqr fTTd a-te qtti fqfg qq qi$di 1% qq qffq fdqr 
dr sgqq qf qfdr qq fqqrc dt dq qq^rr qr^qr, dtd % qffq fdddt qdff 
d ^ qdf dd qfed aqfq d qqqfqq fqrqr stt TTdm 37q?q t, 3F Tit qr^ 
tt ti di fqqnpjqq qmqtq fqqiq qf fqqdf d qfq dtdf qq qrqq qfqoq qtf 
ti qiq qra 7 qqqrq 5 t qq qft qqqiq qu qqr t % qfq wqftqj 
qrqq-qqqq qr qqqf^ q^jf q q'qbK tq qr qnqq qrqt qft qrn q 
tr ^ q^q qt qqr qT%q; fqqnt ^^Mdi qt tsjt ^ qPdRqd qfq^' qqqT 
fdqrs qrqf^qqf' q fqqr^ qr fqtq fqqqqr qnqqtqq tqrfqqr 3qqi qq qrqR tt q^i 

qtqd lt\ qls fqqr fqtqt fqrqt qqrq sff7 qq srrqq ^ 7 t t fqqq y,q> 
atr 3 dfq 7 W qqr^qq fqq; fqqr q qtf 7^ 7 ?qqni ^qq qnTqtq fqqr^ qft wf 

qr fqqq q qq fqq qro tt^tt 7 qt q^gq fqqi t qrrq' qfiqt qrt Tjqr 3 #qft 

t fq qT^f' q t ( 4 ) The parties are not within the degrees of 
prohibited relationship It^ qrts fqTfdt ePqPi qqqdi q lt^ qtte fqqr 
qq qfr ^75 3 ^qrq Wqt q wwn 37^' 7. 5 q itwt a^qiq ^tt qqq 7 fqqr:- 

qtqf tt q^ (q 7 -q^) fqfqdg: TTR^q ^ qrq t 3q% ^fi ijqr qq 33d ‘fqfTg: 
TT^rq t qq 7 3# ?f’ 77 ti fqqg srgqrqqr qqwrq q 377^ fq^g: 
qrqqr qqi qr ftrc; “q” qff 7qrqr7 375^ qq qq t % ^11 7-41 q fqq^ 
q?- tfqr q^T qfqf q §7 fqfqdg: 77 tq^r ^ qrq ti snt ti q^ qpqn q^T qrfeq t 
fqr q?' Tqt qft ^qr ti "5^ qf fTTt Tq^s tt ^i<i<d ydld tfqt ti f77 37^qiq 

37pqq q’rg qq pq<gi ^ ‘qTqqd dq q7q;i hf^ qftq fqqr 1t\ TTqrq sfr7 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1336 


1336 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

PrrPi rtt rt§r Pt rrr PP rr rrtrrt ^trrt Pi’ P ir rtr rr Wi rtrrP 

RR RpRRT RTRRT p fRT RRT pP RRTRT P fPp RTRTR 3pR pR^Pd Rp R3JT Pt 
RTRTRt f ? 

«t§Jqqie RR qld-Hrdl <pd) Hrm, Pi^R rkri RRid : r^ho) 

RTRT cTRtJ yilPdcilM” “ ^ ft M I Pc) -d RRR H^RIRiR dS 1-M rfl ” ^cRTfp % RRf P 

rrrrrt PPPr rrt Irrtr Pt rtrP rP Pt rtrPr fRRR rrt Pi “pRdRddfpR: 
fiMHlPfcj xr^ : ” fcRTfp Pr-rr)' P r4h)cr rP rrrr ^:<=KNoh rrtrt rrt Pi 

^RpRRRT cjrgr MpR ^R-^-dPdiiT p pt RR RfpRRTR Rp RRfP * # «ft 4 

rrhP qw qpqunq ^fePtRi Pt rP P rr: ^r w: rr RtpR^r rtrrrrt Pt 

RTI RpRTR RRRR Rt RJRTR ^JRR fpRp RTp fpRTR RTR RTRTRT RT fpRTRt RTp 

ddlfUR Rt rrir^ RRT yPdPMd RTRpt RlP RTRt °RpRdRT P Pt felRF Pi 

PR> Reft ^ PtP fq; ^rrt iP^is rtrrt rrr Reft rP ffR ff Rt rptr p rr 

%®P Rp 3TTRRRRTRT Rptl 

■^jRcTR aqrg Rt Irrr P rrt rr-r?£ Rt fpR 18 sPr 14 Rp Ptrr %rt 
RRT P fPP RR RTpRT RRRpR RRTffP pi RRp fpRTR P Rt 24 3pR 16 P RTR 
fpRIRlff RR-R*^ Rp 3TFJ R Ptft RT%q;i ‘3R2RRf RpR^ RtP’ PP pR fRRRR 

RTrftRp Rp dld't <=II<P fRT RRT RR Pt ffpR RTp R) Rpp 3 hRr 4 Rft Rid dpi I 

fRRT^ fRRRR RR RTRpf P Rlfa^dRi 'pR'RTR RTf Rfl RRiRRR Rpf fRTRT RRT 
fRT ^ R^f RTRRRXRTt f\ 3TRRFR fRR^ Rp pRRI^ild RTfR t RTR^ t % 
fRT R^fRR, RFR^RTRT RnfR'pR R %RT RIRRR RTRTRT RTf 8 R^ RTRRR 

RlPlRT-^qRlPlRT R fRRRR RTR ^ RRT R7t RRiRT, RTRRR af[R RRRRR ^R RTf RRR 
RiR RR^RT t R8TT %R RRRR R^ RTTfR-'pR '3R-ilWIRl RT^fRWH TT^ RT^rmfT 
^^RffRFTTRn’ (Ri. 5/56/5) 'RJpft 5)I^JUIdl*)fd , ^I^UlV^ld VlddlH. (RJ 10/46), 
R RTRRT WURTF5TTR, ^1%# Ti^ R I R R RT R kd«il ^iRRT 

J|U|ch4BT:ll’ ^9hdlPd, 'R ^#T R RTTRJT RT, R*>i| I f^l «lf^4 U H R^rTl’ (R^TRTRR 
RRR4) ??RTfR ^IIRRIr RRRf RT RT^RT fdR^ t Rl?f Rxfs^STT RTt ^RR Tjur 
RRpJRR RRTRT RRT t RRT RRR Rft ^ RR RJRf' Rft RTRTRdT RR yPdqKd t 

fRT^ RR Rt R PPlT I R’P-oRRRRT RTf 'JRdidfjHK RR RR (fRR 

PRI^l'd Rft Rldldddl Rft RtW RR Rp RRRft 3Rfp RRPTt' Rft, fRgRTRRTt Rt R1R 
■^Rft t) fRRTR R RTfR RR RRR Pt Rpt RR RTRiRTI RRJR: 3RRRRTRtR fRRTpf R1 
R[R8fR P" 3TpRl RTTRRtR RRRf sftR PjRRTfRTRT RRRRRt' Rft RR^R fRTRT RT RRTRT 
t fRfg fRRRRRR Rt 'P RRT ’pRTT RTRRT RRTRYRRT RTRRRT ^1 Rt RTp R^R-TJRRT 
RTfRpR Rit Hide) P, fR RpR RRR Rt fPrq; Rpp RfRpR Rpt Pi 3dRp 3TRp 
fRRRTRTJRR fpRlRlfP RTRp Rp RRRRRT Pi 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1337 


ANNEXURE II 1337 

fR RRp qkq k Rlkfq fqqiq qiT ylcNKd %JTT ¥T1 t ^ ^ fq^ qqqT 
qk '5TR: 'H-ScbMI ^TRTT k, fqkj ^R k qkf WI qqf 1? qqr 

Rkfq fqqiq qq yidMKd qr RRkq qfi qfqqr ttri rtr r. 27 t qffkqr 

“q^kf fqqqf <£ fw k qq t, fkR k qiqr wife “-^tt fqqiq qf 
% qq qkq qf aw-’T qfk k qqkf qf fq^ k qpjk ft ^qrr t kfc qf fqi 
fqrkf ^Rt qk rt qiqq q ^ t q? wri qqf qkn sftr qrkf kf qfqq 
^q qm Eicblcbd rt qrqrqq qr 3 ikq q qr fqqRi qrkqr % kfqf rsr rrf 
kfq aiqqT rrtr rrt Rik k 3iqqT fkq qkk srqqT rrr qifq k k fqqqq 
qqqkq k rf^r Rik ki 

qq rri qq qkq qi rrw-t k ^ RP=Fq fqqiqf ki fqqq k ti qiqf qf Ren 
sfk qkq fqqr k fkkkf qqraq qk qf rir rr fqqiq RrKRq qk siqkrqi 
qk 'jqk kk k qffR qiqr k ffkf rrt qq fqkq q <sj u -sd qnk k fqq k <kq<n 
Rikfqqr qr qkq-fkqqr qf srrr qq tjk rfft fqqiqf qk qkq qnk k ^qqq 
fqrqr qqr k qq RFRR-fqRigqi srrqqkqqqi ki 

qq qqqiqq: qq qiqk k % qq qffq qnRkfq fqqiq qf qk kk ^kf qf %q; 
qq qq qk qqqq qqrq ifigTikqr RRfrr qq kfkr qrqrr qrfkq; f%i kT km fqikf 
qqqqqqi qqf qiRqr qqk qqk %q fkfqqr fqqiq qk ^kf^d wf qr 37 ^qR qt 
■^Tqwr qk q| k 'kqqr fqkt qik qqk sffq qffqt qf k fqr ‘fqqiq qf qfkf qkf 
k qfq qq qqqi q?^ aqg 'k 21 qk qqt qq kf kkt kqfk k qq 
fqqiq qk qkqifk ura qq qk qf qf’ fqfqqr fqqiq qq kf qq qk qq qkq 

kr ai^qq qqf t % qqk qkf qifkqi fqfk q %qr ^ ki w 18 qk 2 k 

qq? %®t t fqi fqqiq fqqft kf kfk ai^qq qnjk kt qkqi fqi^ qik qq t 
fqi qq fqqiq qq qqr qtk sfiq qkf qk qq=jkt q^qq k qqrqk qiqiT qqf qkn 
qq qqr % qqkqr q^ kkFR sIr 3 Rnfkqf qf rr^h ‘km qqf qiqqr fqi k 
Tjfiqk arqqf qipjqqkq qqff (siqqi qfq) qqk qf fqrq; qqq qqqi (qr qqqf) ^1 

q^gq: fqqq qqf k qq qiq qwqqr qmifqF: ti q^i qq qq t fqi 

3 iq fkfqqr fqqiq 'k fqns; ^jkqq qq qiqk qk qqqqqqiqi q qfkf fqi k fq^ 
qk qr sfi fqikf qqfqiq qk qk qiqq qiqn qqfi 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1338 


1338 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

d-Pl-s Pq<ri qq fqqi<-3) 

#. q##4 faaMMWPd 

W #' # f#crrg- q#pq fq^qrfq Pd^m srnratf qq cp? fqqrq 

■^TTFcn \ #f ytedddl f#q f- 

qRI 30 — q#f %TT Pqqi5, q# qi? pi qfte # 3qqiq ## # qq# qqqi qTq # 
q?PJ# # "fqq f, PdHl'Phd 3qqi# # # f#qft qqi # qqqq WT ^ qmi 

(1) q# ## fqqiq # wt qq qq # #qq ddidk pi qq^R# aKiddl 
qqfcnqf # 3qqtq cT^ - fqqiq # ## q#f # # q#| qcF qjqqr «m 

( 2 ) qfq qfq f#q# qqf q# <##1 # qqq # qn qm il qqqi qq# fqrqf qq 

■jqq q# q##t qq qq qq q# t qr #qqi q/r ##q oq#q qiq q# Ii 

(3) qfq Pqqis # ## q#T # # qf# qaj pro q# tipt p #qi # 3#q 

#F\ q# qq cdHl #qi 'll 

( 4 ) qfq fqqiq # ##' q#f # q^7 qiq 3qqq?qqq # ^qq qr qFiqr t 3#q 

qT#qiqq # ## qP qq# fqqqq qfq q# qP f#q; qqqq pqq f#qi qi ^qq ti 

(5) qfq ##' q#f # qrrf qqi q# qqrqqT ## qqqsq qqqq # cpg # qtei 

■Scil <51 % I 

^ qq# f# # pr srcqqr fqqiqiqqq #|q ##k fqqq qq #qfqqqr qq # 3qq# 
fqqrq qqqi # w# t % # qq qw qq #q 3qqqqqr qq^di ^ % #fqqr aqq# 
qP 3TjqrR qfq qq# qq^q-fq^q q# ##i qifpi mpuiiJ 5 U| # ^qq #f qq* 

‘q^ii Pm # qffqq?qrq ■pq pit qqq qrqqf#qfsnqr: i qqf 3TqfqT qrfqqrT ^q#srqp 
PT^qf^qrqiq #qT:l (qj. 10, 85, 36) ##qqq^ m!«<i qf! WTqT^ qpqfq: 1 qqT 
qqqT u^icidl qr#fq qjqq: qraq; n (srq# 14 , l, 52) 

qqqfq w qs * t qq# qq q^ q# qfqffqq qq# ^q qw qrpT if## 
^iq# qiq qfr qffqpq q# qfe # f#q qqq qq qqi f, ^q #P: qqq q^iqqqi q#q 
qpq’jEfqi fqqiqr q#i ^q ## #mt qr qiqf #i qqqqqr # I 1 # f#n ti ^gsr qfq 
# qqq <jq 100 q# q#q qnf# '^#qi q#i 

(1) "3TT q.- qq# qnq^ qqq qfqqrqqnq qrqqqrq#qfi 3^####: qfq#rqqrTfqqi 

qf #T qq # qd^aiqn” (qj. 10/85/43 ) 

(2) “ftp# Mllqqlbd Pciycjmq^cqyHdHl 

q#Pr# MqdLdPqMfdMIH] q# qtll" (qf. 10/85/42) 

qcqifq fqqiq qjqq # srt q#f # #f qq qqwqi qrqr qqi t f# qqqiqq q# 
q^iqqqT q#q qiqi f#qn# qq#i t qfq-qf#i ^q ##' q# q#i (qifqqteq) 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1339 


ANNEXURE II 1339 

RR1 c[Rt ^ Rltt fspfm of fRTtR R tt RRRT ^R RR1 ^ RR ypRRHI 
R Rlftl "SR tf RRFR ttRR RTf[t Rig RTf 3TRRf[tRl fRRTRt, $cRlftl 

^ftR> RTRRt Rt 3RJRR PdM fRRR RTRRRRl t 

(1) R1R ft RTR 24 Rt (I4i gRR stl 16 Rt RR1 Ri"4l g°f RIRRt RR 
Wf Rif Rtf RR1 ^Rt Rif y^Hdl ^ RfRRTRR tf R^RT RRI 

(2) fRRR? yo||cK5TT tf Wd'oK RR R ttRT Rlftf, RR RTRR RRRRT tt Rtf 

fRRR? ttRT RlftR 3RRRT Rtf I RR RTR ' lURRH RfR RRRT RfRRRRtSfRFTR^ l’ 
(RRt tf) 'RRfnf xriR faW^dll (W. 5/37/3) 'RRT RSfrferfrT RRjt?TT 
R=fR RT fRR RFt i%RT II (Rt. 10/27/12) 

fcRTft % RRff R 7W?R yPdmPld tl tttf RRFt RutR 3fft 3d/<lRlro| 
Rif RTRt Try rrfr; yRHdigtd? fRRR? RiRf tl 

(3) gRR Rif ynldd Rt rit tt; Rft rtT yPdsid Rt rr Rtf Rift rrt 
rrrr rurt RTftgi rtrr gt Piwm Rift gy Rtf Rt, art, w f gt 

Rf?tPl tlT RTfttl 

RR f^Rlt iff RTRRRRldT Rtf % tfRRT RTRtf RTT RTRFT |g; fRRTR 

RPR^R pd^cllPl RR RRR tt Rtf RR 7TRTRTI %RJ fR 3RRtf tt fRRRf' 

Tt RRRT RfR g RT gilt tl R RURt R1T RTR T^T, R %T«li|dlR Rif tt R 
3RR tftll fwt RTT RTRR fRTRT RTRT t fRTT t !/IK1Rr? , RTRftRl sftT RTftrRT 

^ifdddT rtt Pdobm tr ttr> i ttt rrt f yRg RyftsR tfR t % rT rrtrr; 

R17T 30 R RfSR t R 4 RT iRRT RRI 

RKR1TR t Rf tt TyfTRT %Rt Rf RRT 31R TTR RR^ RR, RR R tfRR 
3Rt?ff Rf fRRg: RfR Rft Rlt RTf RTdt t fRR Rf RTRTpRRi RTR RR RRR fRRR 
y-dPrld tt RRT, fTRRt ^ tRT?RRg sftT RR RR 3TpRRRT #R %RT RRT, fRRR 
■^RR -H I d I Pldl R1 3TpRRRR RfRTf^RT ’jtftd' R1 Rif 3Rff Rft fRR 't ttt RR 
fRRt JJ'JIRit 7RRTR t % Rl fRRK R RR^ ^RR RlfR RRRlfR Rlt RRTRdT 
RR 8RR 7R7R1 RR1I ttt RR7R1 R Rft RftRRtR RflftsifR RTRR tt Rf RTTRit 
^RRt Rft 3TTRRRRTdT ^ Rltf fRRRRftR RRfRR FRTR Rtf RR TTRIRTI RTRR 
fRRlf RR tt ^RfRRlR RTRR R7R1, PdRltdl R d^Rohdl 3Rff Ri RR t ^fetfRl 
ttRT tl RfR-RrRt RT RTRIf RR1 RfRRf ?IR fRRlftR mPhrT R1 7RTR, RR 
RRfRRjt oRRfR 31RR1 TJRf^RTf 3Rff R1 ^Rltf Rtf f^RTTt' RRTfRR fRRTt tt RR7 
R -^RRRl 't Rlt RT TTRlt tl tftt RfRRRl R RRT tfRRl 3TRRff 31RRT RR1RR Rt 
Rlt ^flf tt ^ RRR Rtf RRT RRRR t? fR RRR R7 RRTR-fttfRRf Rlt RT-ttlRT 
fRRR RRRT RlftRI fR RTR RR tt «TR RRRT Rift y % fRR RfRRRT RR 
RRRPRR fRTRl RTR Rf Rltt RlfRTR RRRRT Rlt 3fR tt fRRlRt RTRT R tt I 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1340 


1340 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(ft^ dfl-s f474 47 PddK-4) 

3ftT ^Pd 3Trfc[ irsr 

4. 4%7 P^ldM74Pd 

474: d>6l ^TTcTT t 1% fd°ll6 77 *4 -4 Pd-c^>3 (f477 '^TT'N K u I cl 'd I dclldi 4? 414 7? 
475cl t) Pd^ 4% cTSTT Pd^ -HHM 4ft 41447 4? 77t2H P=H?.& 77277 3774? f775 77^271 

4474 4*77 t f47747? 377 ftcf “5747 it-^ 47474 47 47147 47 747 tl 4tt 474 ’-IKdld 
773 W?4 773 47774 (Mlfcl4l44) f 4. 4877)4457 %% 3% 77%f t 477 477 
4ltt 4t f47^ 7-4 Pi 4 -47 447 Wldddld 37^4 77Tft74 477 f4’4§T4T77 37^ft774 4774 47 

4774ft 37777447 743 4177 tl ?l7? f47 477 4)71 4? 417P447 474 ?? t 15347 ^44 7? 
%47 371447? 44 37^4744 4774 3T?7 f4415 144447 %47 f444f 44 47774 4774 74T Tit 
Pddl6 ■H‘4'4 Ph-^ 4 44 444 tt 4tt 43 774774 f474J 34 377447? 7? ^7 tt? 37?7 %5 
f4474 44737? 47 37^7744 47 4444 41 4?T4#7 374727T 3743 tt %? t 44' eft 477 
7744 37747 f4417 47747 tl PdHPdPsld 747471? 444? 47? 477 77RR7 f «44 f 77447 
47%! 774 4 5? t 377 7% 444 47? 3554 47774 5 4t ? : 

(1) 5% y%H, 474?% 4T xrf77% 47% | 4%74T44g 4 1 Pi U II, 4f7T7^f? f%sf?4%ll” 

4?- %47 47T4T777jf4 4? 37. 4 44 47447 30 tl 57J4T774f77 47 ‘c% 4TTT4TT: 

TJJTT:’ 37447 ‘477% 4714T7? 7%: II* 5747f? 4? 3757717 477 =bPd^l % 4417 4t7lf447 
4lf 41 f% 445 f44T 477 f43?4 477 7# t 774 % 37f447 574lf447 4144 tl 44 

447f47 44 372? 743 t % — 

4% 4? 43 tt % (344? 54 tt % 37447 3774? f?44 % 47?i 774744 414 4 

tt4), 47 414, 773777? tt 414, 577747 tt? 37447 4f7T7T 4? 414 47 — 54 475 3774f7741 

% f744t 4? f?5 ^77? 4f4 44 f44T4 f4747 31717 tl 

f% 4? 44 4fT7414 4774? 57741474 4 % tf 4747 47§75 f%37? 4ft ^3 t 
4f44 t? 4141 374: 474 30 4 dpMd 37447 4147 44 f4 3444 4747 47 774747 t 

477?? 47?t ■H-te 4ttl 

5% 41457 t f47 4t7lf447 4F4447 77277 41^ 577 %47 4? ‘477?’ 44 372? f44lft4 
4f4 44? f475J 3474PT4I44f4’ 47 474? 4f77 4773 577 447147 44 7443 f4475 777447 
% 5% 4745T 47474 4ft 374747 f 4144 t 3%7 ^714774 47? % 4fe 444 477 

??7T7 372? 4774 44 ^^ISTH 4774 tl PdicJ < 4f4: 374% f4cPldd ’ f4 4737 4 f%444 

372? 177474 S4df 47?^ t? tt 45? 774747 f47 51% 4f4 44 f4474 14747 4747 t 34<t 
477 4474 47? f4777I747 f77^ 5777? tl 44? *4771’ 47747? 37|t?y4?4 4744T tt 3f%4 tl 

577 47 tt 4f4 14777? 44 77% tt Tit 41% H^'P^dl 37^414 12 ^ %47 9 9 47? 
5447 47% 4t % %f 4 t : 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1341 


ANNEXURE II 1341 

“xTraft RRpRR cR4t^S?T xrf?T% RRl WTRTRRJ HTRU|j, TTfrTT^Tt 

(%Rf O^dTddl RdWlPORItRlHTddl RPRfRR 4 TTfeprrr -HUiif^dl f^H. RR 

1929 R. 144) R?T RRp OT R^RR RRTfRl Rif f\ #£ ^ RRR'PlR Rf f^TTT RRT 
ti rtr rr fRi ‘Wr rfr rr rrir i xsfr dlPR><* Rft ^ 

Rt RlfRT RfRl tl ^RRIT 31«f RRf t # RRl fRRT RT IpR tl R^; ^RlPd 31. 
9 xj. m t} tff R^ TjFTtei xrri RTRT tl 3HpH^|U| 31. 154 Rt R^t RFTfRl 

xrtrr Tqfd ^ -qra ^ srjrk fewn ti 

RfRR tr4 R^ IJR Rf RTRlflRPR R 3tLtrdlRr4pd4^cR|^ 18/4 Rif °4lteMI R 
%HT tl 

3mfn:-3if^mpT ^chi ^iPiJimPddi rrt r 'rg^ Tjrf rrIrth, 

rrt^ R 4 Pdd Ltd'll xrEtwxng hi (fun RfrRRft fRsftR^’ ffm 

(RM x?. RTgRR RTTIRt RRktH xjr ^jr UJRlPdd “%l4^h” oqRfn 41TR 

xj. 1012) W ^fRT t % ddRlPd Pjfd ^ 4 ? RFTfRl xr-rt rpr RT Rfr 

Rlfd fR RRR RPJxfcRTT RRRPR R#T #ftl 

31 fd Pldd dllslMI R4R1R TRSTRIRTT RldPrld RRTCR x^ rxjri% cjuRxjRT RTXR 
R%R RRR 1992 R ¥R4%R |[f «ft 3RR RlpRR O^RlPd R 3llR4JRR 

fR!R| 3RR IFSlf t) RJ Ri R1R Tf Rf^TR 4>dl<=bT Ri) ‘RRi% dP44d’ RIRRT ^JPu^ 
fdRXXR TRR xer 31TRR XR %R1 RRl t fRRRt Rcftcl RfRT t % xq^Ff R^Rlfd 

^^4? x/cdldi xq-pu xrtrt rh xjj) RFffRT ^RRt RRfd-'5R 1 4lf4 R xqqRq xrjrj -g) 
XRRRlf x^t # R4R41 Riff RJ RRTR1I 

(2) RxjTRfR 31. 9 44TfRl 72 Rt fR RXRxir r pc|dKui)i| f Rf fipR PdPldd t : 

"fgrfSTRR wrdR^llfLl , RT^^Rf Pc)J|(^dlH., ■snfSTRTR PdUdLrii' rt, 45RRT 
jdtrlU-L^I " 31JRT4 RT^JRRTRRTR # R ^R7^4RT ^R, R R 

xpRRR RW 41 W 193 R fR R41R f4Rl f- 

“RT Rif RfRcT t % 31 RT^xtt ^R RTRlt TtfRoft, RRrf Rj^ft 31RR1 dddlll 

4R^ Rt 4RRT 4lf fRfRxj^ Tjgrrr -q\ Rq-pi RR I ’’ 

(3) dKdld RJRTRcIT 12/32 R %HT t : 

“RRJ dlRRdl cKtRIR^, 31RTWR y-M^Pdl ^T% ^ RtirT RTR: TRIR;, 3RR)RT 
RTRtrftRTRf: II" RTgRR4RRTR Rt R rR4TTR4 RW xj. 194 R ^rrr 31^414 4' 
fRRT f;- 

“Rf4 4R41 ^ 4fR Rif folldil RT Rif RRR1 Rt xrttt 4 ) cpr cfc^ii 41 ) rur 
3ff7 R 4 ^ RfR Rif P«>Hldi< RRRT ^ fRRl?’ fRIRT X4TR Rf RRRT RT Rif cRRT 
tR 4R R RiTf 314RRt R iRlTl” ( rR^trrrrr rm 194)1 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1342 


1342 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

fftR) tototo ffteT ^ ^ ftftft ft torTO TOft Pris TOTO stIto tort 

TOTOT t fftTT TOTO 3TTTOTT Rijdd RER TOftteT fttft tl 

(4) TO^TTOPd 3T. TOTO PdHPdRsR TOeftTOT ft) ^FT 7 RTOR ft ffttfa PTOTORuftTO f : 

“ y I Pq ei'l snfronrofsf, TOfftg-ftl ^TT: TORT: I ffteiisf q-sydsft RT, <*)iHi?f ftlftej 
TORTONII 

^srr^jflj^iiTQ^M i TjtfPtr i mckkvI r)*hh 7 TORJTORrfftTOcTTfftft)ii’’ 

(TOg 3T. 9/76/81) 

^FT TOTO 3T«f TRfft <RHR, sf) TO TTeTOTftyTOdid ift Rejft TOyedITO ft ^FT TO fftTOT t: 

“■gro TOT %TT ft) fTOTOTO t fftr TORTOT ft) eft RTOft (fftTOR ft 8 TO? TOTOT TOTO) TO 
TOft TO Tft) TO-dld ft) TOR TO snft eft TOTOlft 'SR SR ft) eR eR TORT ft) ft) 3 ST TO 
ft) eft RRTjft TOft TOTOT 3ftr 3TfTR TORR TOR?) ft) eft TOT: TOT TOTO) TOT Rfe TO ^TOTTO) 
TOTO) ft fTOftiT ert <£ TOTFfteqfeT TOR ftftl ftft ft) sf) TJRT 3TeTOR 'JTsTTOTTOTOT ft) eft TOTO) 
TOT TOfTOTO t fTO TOT TOT 75te TO ^TTft tJTOTO ft fTOTORT TOT TO TOTTOTITORTfTO TOTT s£ TOTOT) 
fa TO I fed T rfeT s£ RTOTOTTOI TOFTOR TOTT ftft . . . RTOTfft TORTTftTOTOTRT 27TO)' TO1TO TO. 73 

(5) RJTORfeT 9/79 ft %RT t fTOT TOTOT RfeTfT TORiTOH STTOftsf TOR TTplURj r 

rttoPsItto fgTORTFsr to si TOTTOTTOTOefroTOi 

TORT?) TOTOt%TOlftTOSftftftTOfeTftiTO TOFeft t sft TOTOT (TORRT) t, TOft TOT 
TOR TORft TOfeR ft) TOTOT t, RJTTTO TOTOT TOfe 3TTfft TOTOTOTT TR ft TO t (ft TOTTOt 

fftftfro ftrro to tor TOft) fftro sn trttoti 

TORTTO fft\ fftTT TO) TORT 30 TO ^ft) TRTR TO) TOlft T/ft) TOft t ftft TOTHTO 

ftp® sft TORTTO -ft TO^eT TOTOT) -ft ft® TRTft tl 

( 6 ) TOTffftcTO 3TftTOTTTO TOftTTOk TOpTOTORT 3 3TTOR 2 TO TOTOTOT ft %TOT t:~ 

“HMeft TOT^R TO TOfTSTTO) TTsriTOfeRTOft I TORTTfftFRT TOfTOTO: , TOTOTO: 
ckd) c(ft S8(c(Ti| fd : 1 1 ” 

“TOTTOT gJRT'TOIgT: ” TOpFsffTO 3T. 3/4/19 

TOTOfeT TOfeT Rfft ftftsr 3T)R TOffteT ft) TOTO TO), TORTO RoTT TOTO ft) (3TftF TOFTTO IWT 
ft SJTOS qlld TO ft) eft Pidd 3Rfft eTTO TO^ ^ TOgRTR sft 3TfftTO ft 3TfftTO 8 TOft 
ft TOefftTO TOR TOfftTO TOsn ft TOTOTfft TOTOTOF 3RTOTO), TOeTORT TOTOTO TOjFTTO ft) ft) 
TOTO eTOTR tl 

TOTOFTOT ftTO ft TOfft TOeft) TOTO eTOR TOT RRTOR fftsftro ft) TOTORT tl 

(2) TOTO TOTOfft, TOTORRTOTfft ft RTf TOTOTOT 3TR ft) TTOftroT TOTOTO TO^SR fTOTft sn 
TRR t f%3 TOTO fftTOTO TOT fTOTOR TOTOeft ft) TORTOT ft) TOTOT t 3R; Rft TO^eT TOTOFTO 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1343 


ANNEXURE II 1343 

fir ft RR fRRRR RTTRT R1RRT \ fft RR RRRf Mfe TRRRqT RTf ftRT TJRTTRT RTfftft fft 
RRRT fcl^klR RR fftRTT ftf RTRf fRRjfftR Rfft-Rftf ft RR ft RRFR R ftf dftlsld ftfr MlPdsId 
Rft rr W ft RRlff RTftR ftRfftd ft ■g^T RTR ft-Rfft Rfft-Rftf RTT ft RR RRRT RT fRRRT 
RftaTT Rd|cR>RRi ftf RTftl RR RRR-fftftftRT RR fftcT RTT ftRT ftf RRRT RTTRT RTfftftl 3RRRT 
fftftR 3TRTfrT , RTRTffRRT RRT, RRRafRTfft ft WR1 r fRRIR Rftft RR 3RRR %RT RT RRRTT ft, 
fRRg R^RTR RftfRTfR ft Rfft fft 'STTRffft R RHT RTR ft 3RRRT fRRTR ftfT ftftT RRTaTTft 
ft Rjft 3RR RTfft RTR ftf R ftf, TR*FR PR^k ftf 3RJRfft 3#RR RTRR ft RR ft ft RT RRTft 
t RT RRRft Rift RR 3T?RfftRT RkRT RRTRT RTfftf RTfft RRRR ^RRRtR R ftf Tift I RTfRRR ftftf 
ft RTRTRT RR ftf 3RRRT ^RR RRT fftTT RRT ft RTlft RRRR ftdR>dl R RRTRTT RR 3RRRT fTR 
ftf T?T t ftf 3TRTRT 3RRRT fftftfR t 3RT: RR RRRR RTRTRT R RTTRT RTfRRI 3TR:ftfR 
TR 30 ftf fR HR ft TOT ft RR|R R>f aft RRR fftR RRTRR -gf 3T?RTRRRRT nftcT ftft ft: 

( T ) ftRT fRRR RRT fftTT HTR fRT fRRT? ft 8 Rft RTf RRT R>ft TRR^R fftftR ft %R RTafRTRR 
Rftf ft RRRTT ftfT R fftrff Rft ftft RgRfft RR 3TRfft RRT ftf Hftftfl fRRRTR-TJR "ft RTR |[3TT 
ft fft 5 Rft ftf 3TRfR Rft RR fRH ft yftfdl TfftfRR ft RR ft' TRH TRfRTTT RTRf Rft RRTR 
ft Rfft Rft 8 Rft RRT RRT fftRT HTR ftf arfftRT 3RH5T Rft I RR RpR ft R^R srfftRT TRRTRRT Rftf 
ft fRT Rfft-Rcft RcfT grft ft TRRTRlfft ft MRPdd fttRTT TRR^T-pRftRpl RR fRRR ft R RTftftl 

(2) RftRRTRT, MHIdMd, RRTTfft Rft fftfRT?RT RT %R; ft 8 Rft Rft RRpR RRT RfRR ftl 
Rfft Rcft-RffR fRfRTTRT ftft ftRT-R|8JRT RTRT RT ftf RTTR R ftf 3f[T RfR-Rrft TRR^R-fRRRR 
RT Rf RRTRT ftf RT RR 8 Rft Rft RRpR RT RRRTR T3RRft 3TgRfft ftf RT RRTRt ftl 

fftRTR-fftsftR iRRRRT RTR 30 ^ RPdPTRd RRT 33 ft ‘ 3TRTRTR 3RTRRRf’ ^ fRRR ft RTRT 
RRT ft fRT: 

“fRRIR RT fttftf Rftf ft ft Rftft ftf ^TfRR Rift ftRT fRRIR RR RTTRT RT 3TTRR RTTTT ft RRR 
RRcn Rfft TFgft ftf ^fRR ft fftcTT 3TRTTTR Rft RR 3TTRTT RT 3TRTTTRf STTTRRRf Rft fftrff 
RTfRT 'ft fftR RTafRT RTT RRTRT ft fRT ^RR R^T— 

(R) RTaff Rft R^T ftft RRR ft ftfe "^RR ft fRT fftRRft 3TRfft 2 Rft ft RTR Rftf ftl 

(?) ftft ^RR RT 3TTRTRR RR ftfftf ftf TJRR ft fe fftR RT RTRTRRTR RTftf TRRR R8J 
ft RTaT TRR ft RRftfR ftf "fRR ft 3TRRJ 

(^) 3TRTKR, RTRTRT, 3TTCR1TTRT ^TTpR ft ftffftR ftf TRT ft ft fft RRTS STRTaTT ft ft 
Rafj ftf fft Rft RTaff ftf 3TfT ft Rftf TTRf ft Rafj ^cft RRR ft RR ?R 'SRpT ft ftlPsd ft 
fftRftf 3TRfft RR RTftRT-RR ft ft RfftfftR RRRT ft RTTRR RR[ft ^RT ft ft RTR Rftf ftl 

(Ri) RRT RRTRRT RRRT ft (Rft) ft Rffft ftf TRT ft 3T8TRT 

(ft fftT? ftf cTlffn ft ftRTT Rft ddldK TRTRTfftT RTRRTRR ftf "^RR ft 3T2TRT 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1344 


1344 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(3Tt) dU'OirH eFRR F^lTTR 3 ojrf^rsrTT FIT FjcJTT fl” 

RR fRFFf 3 Ft 1 sir 2 Ft Fft 3TcTf%T ^ RFR ^ M ^ M 5 ^ ^ 
wft "srr1%TT| 7 ^ sT^TFrcft 3FRFFFt, tf^I r«tt fFFTF fFFk ^ f*RR t 

3TR: ^rFrTMM' RFT 3RFf Ft %TT FFFT FTRI FTfFt fFTlft RFTRt TftFJjfF TTTF 
TFt Fit TJR: 3«Jd Ft FIFT 

mPd5lci f! Ft FFTF FT fFFF if Ft RTF FTRT t FF RtF Ft I 3TR RTFf 
TF% RFt % FF FFTTf FTFPd sftF TT«TRT Ft fTF* fFRfF ^IfTF Fit FT^ t 
fFFFft fFRRt Ft FF1TTT Fit FRT «M tl ^:TF Fft FTR FFt t MHlsId Ftf Ft 
FFTF FT fF^ TTFTF F RRRT FRT RFt f|FT FTRT 3RFFT F^t ^llFdl4 FFT R 
Ftcft, 3fR R FT FFTTT FT fRFFf ^ft Fitf 3TTFFFFTRT FfRf I FFtFT F TTR 1931 
Rt fF^ FTfFtTt FIT FFFT RTRRF fF^F Ft ST^FfR FT FTTRR fFFFTR t, fFR| 
RF ^ 3TF RF RR FffRFt' Fit sftT ^ FFT' FFct RFTF Fit FFT R aft FtFRT 43 
Ft FfTT m t fFR Tf l^T 3RFR FfR Ft 3fk RT FTTRT sflR FftRFIF Ft FTI 

3TR: FT RF^FR FlTT3tt Ft Ft R FTRlt fT^ 3TR FRRT if RTtFRT RRFR FRt 
Ft fRTF; FT FF l +<dlFl FT TFT 1? fF FT fFFT Ft 3 h^k FF FF3T FfFt ntd-Hcdl 
TTF ^TTt FT FftRTTF FT Ht sflR FT FFR fF^ FffR 3tk RTTFt TH^Pd FT 
RIFT Ft FT^FT, FF FTR TT^FT 3TTTFT 'll 

FRT 34 F qxf^; ^t?r R-qy -f fqy “Fit! Ft fFFIF RF RF FRJRf RtT FT 

Fft?FFR 13R RFf fFFRT FT^FT FF RF fF RTT FT fFTTt TFjfFR 3TTFRRR FRT 
FF FttFR FTTl TFT t^Tft RFf Ft FTRt fF ffRR fFFTF FT Rt fFFTF-fFR^R ^ 

fF^ -M FT8tRT-FF FT TsTRF fFFT FFT t FFFT fFTTt 3RF ^Tlt FRJRt FTPfFIFt 
F TTFTFT fFFT FFT t fFTRt fFFTF FT FTFFFR (^FRT) tFFRFtF fFFF FTI " 

FRT 44— fFFTF FdlPki TRF^Ft Fc^F tFTft Ft fFTTT FF FRT Ft f| t FF 
FT^Ft^ FRT FFFT #t FT fFFF RtFtl RRTTfR RR fRFFt FT ^TFFtF fFTft Ft 
3TFTFT ^t R FPt FFT Rff R FRT tFFT FRT (f|tt fF FTFFRF ^?ft F 

t) FF %TFRt ^RT 3TTFFFF tl “ FTTR F RIFFF 90 FfRFTR FTfR^ Fft ^ 

^sff F 3# f| fFRlf TFF^T-fF^R Fft FFT fFTTt R fFTTt FF F FFIrTR t", 
FF FTRRlF FT. 3T^FFT FT FFR FFT' RF RtF t FF ^ RTR RFt I TRFFR: 
RTFt STr^fFR Ftl FTfR'jtF Fft 3TfRtTFRRT FT FTRFT Ft ^FT TTFF F RFTfF F^ 

RTTTF Fft FFT Ft RRF TTFRlt 3TFFT R^ 3TFRT^ Fft TjfFR FT RF F FTRR 
Fft RFTR R#'l FT' TT^FT 3TfRTF TTTFR FT RTF F RFTFRRT R Rtt FT Ft RTTFft 
ST^FfR 3TfR fFFtF 3TFTFT3ft t ft F TTFctt 'll FR F FT?t TTFTR fllfFFf FT 
fFFRTst %T# FI 3TTRTT t TTFTFfFR 3tk FTTTFtF FFRT Fft ?FTR F TTlI fir RR 
FT fFFH RftF fFFF FtFT fFFR Ftttl Ff| FcfFTR FTpFRtF FftftFfR FT 3RF 
Ftf FfRFTR Ft TTFRT t Rt RTTFT Ft fR^FT FUl 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1345 


ANNEXURE II 1345 

(%^ F>l-S fTOFT FT iqTOK-5 ) 

gTtt^) afrr 

F. £j4^c( icl^llcll-ol^lid 

TOiW fTOFT it adlq FPT F qqcf, 1%FTF 3TTOTO FtTO ctt ItoITOTO IdTOTO t 
3fR TOTJsf FTF 4' TOFITOFTTOFT (FTTOfFTFFF) sftT FTTOtTOdlR fTOFFTOI f^T tHf TOFt' 

4' TOf&iF ^r-^r tofto)' ft t w ^tro 4' FfronF f^rorr wii 

TOFt FTO ft^3Tt' f TOTO #t ftro fFTO-fFTO TO F? t'l FTF 3 f TOt 

Ftoftoft tt tot fto froro fto t to) ftottfIf ti 

‘FtTO FR Ft fFFTO 4' TOFTOciT’ TOHTO oFft TOF 54 4' TOFT FTO t fTO TOtf Ft t^TT 
% ft^ TJTO fTOFTOt ttTO F FTOF (FTOFT IldPHTO TOTOFTT) TOFF tl 3^ TOIFt 

TORJ TO 18 TOf ^ TOT "^TOT t, FF IF FtTO (TOFTO) FR TOt TOFTcIT FTOTT tl 

1tof| to 4 q? t fe TOff 41 i jto arroft FFft TOt tojfIf ffto frot 

14 dl FtF 'Ft <4 J II I ffft •H'-nld 4 TOFTO ^JF ott Ft Rrtq, 1 8 Ft TOt TORJ TltTO 

TOIllkl tl TOF Ft TOF 25 Ft Fft TORJ TOT fWT TTTOTT Flfttl ^FT fTO 4 fF 

FtTTOTTFTT TO F«TF Ft® 4' FTO tJTOT ^ fF TOTF fFRT TO FFRt FRTf' 4 fF^JTF TOt 

FTO TOT TOR FTOt fij FTF 62 Ft TOFT ( 3 ) 4' FITO TOt TOFTO RR TOT TOfFFTTT 

froro t, qR F^f) Ft fqro 4 ft^-TOF TOt ?tof froro Fti 

FfTO fFFFT 4 14 ^ TO4 cTOF Rll Ft Ft TORT 61 TO TOFT (3) F FTTFi FtTO 
RRt TO TOfFFTTT TOt FFRT FFTT FTO tl TOtf Ft ft^ TO4 'M ^F FITOTO TOT 

arfFTOFR frot frorr FFf ff ftotoi 

‘FtTO ftrot TOR) TOt TOFFTO’ fFIFTO FTF 63 4' FTOTO FTO t fTO TOtf Ft ^fIfF 
FF FTO FTTO Prl4 FlA TOFF TOTFT Fsft TritFT TOF FTO fTO PlMprlRad TOFT Ft 
TFF^F F FFTOFt Fit Ft TOTFt : 

( S fcl 

( ^ ) Pccurgd F^t in 

( ^ ) FF 4g<ri % Ft FfF Fit RdFi FTT t>(cw 

(55) FF 3TFFt 31T^ ^ 15 TOf Flff FrT "^TOT 

fFt TOtf 4/4) TOF FFt ^ fFF FT TO^F fTOTO TOT FFil FTOT FFxTOJ°t TORT FF 
i fro Ff^ ^4 fTOFF 4' TOlfFR ft\ fTOTOTF (TORJF) 4' fTOTOFTF TOTfF fTOFTOTO 

yldd'TO TOTf FFT fTOTO FTO 41 TOcfFR 'TORJF ^ 3T^FR TOd<rl FFt TOTFTTO TOTf FFTO 

Tf fFTTO TOT FTOFT 4 TOt FtF TOF TORt Fit 3TFFt TOTfF TOF 4t I FTO 

TOTfF- 31 TO I Id 4l TOT FfFTOTO TOt FTO fTOTO FTO tl fTOg fFFT tt FfcTTOTO FTO FTO 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1346 


1346 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

1? 1% RH iff I Rif R Ridel ^ 3TRRT RR ^TTTRIT Rf Rite fRRT 

fRTtfRRf 4 3TR ^ Rf # RRffRR fRIRT RRT, fRI ^Fr£ 3RJRIT fRIRf 

Rf iRfRR W\ RI# RR ^HHHId R #FTTf Rf RRf R #f RR RlR fRRT RT RR^RT, 
RRRlf 3TTTTRRT TWRRT RTR #fff t RTfR fRRRRI RfRR^T Rif RTfR: fTT fw? # 
RTff 3TIR!>RRidl R 4MRlPldl Riff, RR: 3TTRTT t RRTT HdldPd RTRT TTRf FTRMRicItfl 
fTT RTTT RIT r4hH RR # WR Rlfjll TTRlfaf HdlRPd RTRT ifRRRRlf Rif Rf 
f7TO 3T5TFTR #TT TRTRTfRRI t fRRf fTT ■FPPWdl # TTRTR 3#T TPR Rif RRfR 
RTR-RR tl Rf, Rf RRRf d,p r L|d RTfR-4MHlfd RRI RRRI rf# Rf 3TpRRITT Rif 
RfrpTcT TTRRT RT# RRR# R IWT #TTT RR# Tf ffRT# H#f, Rdf TJ?f TRRRRT #1 

RRRI fRRTH #' RRT mRr4h Rf RRT TTf#fR # fRIRT # RR ^TT RRRRT #' 

RRRfTRRfR #1 RlfRTR fRRTR Rf 3RJTTTT RRRI "JR fRRRT Rif, fRTT H RTf RTR #' 
%RT #, TTTTf TRRfR RT 3TpRRITT T7R TTRTRT RT 3#T RTT Rf RTTTRT R#f TjRRTTRTRf 
#T#f TRRf Rf sfR RfR #f# RTRff fRRRT Rif 3TRTRT R#t RRRfR #f RTRf Rfl 
3TR RTTT 68 # fTT TTT5FR #' RIRT RRT # fRI : (l) RIFT RT fRI fTT RTTR 
Ri 3TTTT-R #f# Ri RTR RIRf fRRRT RTR #TRf # RR RTTT RK fRTRT l[3TT "JR:— 

( 3T ) RR fRRRT RT RR Rif ■Hid fRyRTRTT ( <4 Id 't' ) SKI RRR) 

RfR dldf fRRT RTfRR ^1% ^ RIR ^Rf RTRRTR Rf fRI 

RR Hid HR ^ Cbl4 RT Hg,H H Pd r^, d RIRR R IdSiHId sff, RtTTT^IRIR 
R Mim Rif R^ sff, RR RIT 3RRT H J 1 1 1 

RTRTT i fRRRRffRT RRRT 'gTR fR RRpT fdRR RIT Rf R^RR R RTTR RRT RR 
fRRRT Rf Rf?T R^i^fR Rif R1RRT R RRTRT RRT t, RRIRR R RTpRTRR fRIRT 
RTRRTI 

RIRTfRR 3fk RR^ RT^TRI ^ TRR^R 3 Rf RTRlf RTR 4 R Rf R| t, RR^ 

TTK5RR if RTpRRI %Tr 4 Rif RTRRRRIRT R#'l RRT 78 R f%^ RTRTfWT ( 3TRRRRTRI) 

^ TRTRrfRRI R7RRI ^ fRRR RRTT RRT t:~ 

1%Rf RTRTfRR Rif fRRRT (RTRRRR) RRT RRRI RTR RTR RRRlf TRRfR 

Rf RTRR if RRRi RRTRTfRRI RT3TRT f- 

( 3R ) fRIRT RTRTRI RT 34fRRT%R RRRT RI RTRRT R fRRT 3RIT RR RT 
RTR RTRT, fRIRT RTR, RR Is fRI TfR RTRlflRR RIT RTSRTT ( RRRRRRTR ) 

RT Pdi 3TRRT 3TTR ^ did RR RRTRT dgl RIT RTRT 't' RTRTRJTRRT RRRR 

RTRT RIT TCRTTI 

(f) fRTRT RTRTRTT RTRTRT 3TRRT 3TfRRT%R RT^RT RT RTRRT R RTRT 
dflT dHdi RTR fRRTI 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1347 


ANNEXURE II 1347 

(F) |c(vh) fqcillgd dschl efe HiHrl ft <3'<rlc+>i FfcT fch'd FIT t 

fF Ftf Ft T^FTT oyfcKi FT STITT efe f^SIFTf efr STSTtF fed 41 'ilotlRdM FT 

TTTSjTF FT 3 lfsjFTT Fjff TSl^TTI 

( 3T ) FfF FT ^*4 Ft T^TFT -c^chi t'l 

( ^ ) <4 Id dfi dufddl 3flT SlPrlH WM Sjki 110 Ft ddSjKl ( 1 ) tf 

^fcrm fl'fa'iiT tr ft ftirr 3 T 3 W wt Ft ftft ^ft fi 

FRI 81 f ^TTRTT FT! t % FF TFIFfRF TTTSTF fF\ Ft Ft FTP! xjqq 
t F¥T FTFt 3#TFTT TTTTT FT TFFT tt W^TTI W 83 f ^TTRTT TIT t fe 

fFrrt ffPft fF^ ^ ttt?3f ft frIf ff % ^ ^ writpr ft =£ 
w t m ttwi Ft Ftf *ft ft^ f 4 4t ttfT wn oqfFi fF^R wf 
FT smrsff ^ 3#TFFT fFt fFTT FTt Tl? *HFdl I "RF 3plT FTT PdTIFI FT W1 
t FFte 3fn TTRsfq -gff 31M2RF FTt?T ttTTT t TMlPdO FRf FT FTF 
^ 3TfFFTT Ft W*l«J.Rl tl 3R TW ^ fFFFT f FF w 13TT t % 

FTFt Ft^TT Ft Weft aft, F?i1f TTTTTf Ft FJTTR W qq T*TR TTFTI FF tl 

FFT FF % FJPTfo 3T. 2 FTtF 145 t %®T t % ‘ 4FSFFH <* VI Ml 4: 
3TM|i|fu|f Wef ffcRTT TTFFRJ fWRTrTT , iffT^mirriTST^l’ 31«lf?T 3TIFt F T*TR 

io wwff ft tt ff ft t, ftrar ft 4n 100 FFtf sftr wi ft 1000 

FhcI I 3ft it tt Fo FT tl 

FT ffe Tt FT 'FTT F^pT FTTFf Slfc ?TR1 82 ^ FT 3 TTT ^iT f% ‘ FTef 
^ t fe FT W ^ %Tft qt %ft W ^T #TT fWTT W^Tl Fl fwt 

«Hpdd ^ TR^TF 'FT Fl4 t JTT <=h<4 F PlM, TTTpTFR FT TT^ dR 'TRTfTTT 

Ft FRIT FtfFT t 4NlPd J l Ft TFTFrfRF FTPSIFT FR Ft 

^RTF F FlRF TTFft tl' FT 3TpFFFT FT?t t'l 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1348 


1348 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(%^ ohls l®l<n RT fRRR-6) 

4-M-Mprl f cfc 3Tf^TT 

R. £j4^c( IcISIIcURTRid 

fTT 4' 4' RR RTTT3Tf RT fRRTT RTTRT RTFRT \ P*H<=hl TTRFR ‘fepff 

RT TPRfrT 4' RfRRRT’ pt TTTR tl RT TTT TPRfrT 4' RfRRTTT RT 4' RRpt 

TPR 4' fRRTT R7RRT I t Rtf tWI Ft Rt fRRTRTRF af[T RfFR t I tt TRR 
R^RT f^Tf RRT fR fRRRf' RR ^IIT-rIr RRT <RIRFftRi ^ fRRTT fRRT t afR 

■gff RF %Tlt 4' TTRftR RFf fe RRt RR 4' TpfRT RRRd mRu||R RR RjTRt 4' 
’JpfcRTT TTRsf RFT Ft TTRiT TTRTIr ST^RT fRRRf RTf RtTRRg: RRRT T[ft RfRcT RcftcT 
FteTT t RTfe RWR^ild RRRT RRT fRF^RFpft RT RR RwffTR ^ fRRR RTT TTRtl 

fepqf RRT fRRRTaff RR RRRfR 4' 3TfRRRR FtRT RTfFP RT RFf sftR RfR #R 
RTftt eft RF RftfRR Ft 3TRRT ^ ^tRR % fRT fRR RTt RTTT 91 PR 93 4' 
dtVrlRsid tl FR RRiaff R RTFT RRT t : 

TRt Rit TPRfR ^ y<RiK-( 1 ) fRT chls ^ TH R-rlrq if TTnjpfrTRT 3TT% ^ 
RR Rh41 TRt 'gTTT RTt Rt ■<ri*-M Prt RPR Rit 'Ri4 J H RF fRFRRTRTRT RT Ri'fll 
( Absolute ) 3tHchl TPRfrT FtRt I 

3TRRTR— ( 2 ) RRRTTT ( 1 ) tf esIWlParT RTtf RTR Rh41 ffTETt TPRfrT RT C'll-u 
RFf Ftnt Rt fRT TRf UTT Reftt RTR ^ RT iRTTTt RTTfRRRTtf ^ 3TRtR RPR 
Rif R^ t 3tfiT RTFT RTR PR RTTtRRRTit Rif FT^ TRRTTRR RT SU'jqPich TRR 4f 
Tf[TTt TPRirT ^ Rit tf TTtfRR' 3TfRRTTT RRTR RvTRt t RPT^ iRi RRR 3TT^RfRR) 
31TtFT RTT RRRR RR TRt RlffT ^ RTTTR Ft RFt FtRTI 

oqi <34 1 -fTT RTTT tf ‘TPRirT TRt 'STTT RRRRT RTT 3flT 3TRTT RRR TTRirTRf 
RF TPTT^RT FtRT, fRT RT% RF y iPn RTT^ iRRTF % RF^ RT RTR ^ Ft 3TRRT 
Ry ci| ch I ed ■% RSR 4r ^ Ft 3tftT Rlt RF RRTTfRRnft ^ RR 4r RT iRTTt RTT^f R? 
RRTTRRR 3TiTRTR tf 3TTf Ft RT RRRlt RT 3TRRT fRTTTt TPRRTt RT RPR RTfRR 1RT 
iRTTTt RTR % RT 3TRRt RT^ft RT RRTR % RT TlftR % RT R^RFRTRtRRT RTfRRFT 
% iRTTTt dO«h % RTRT ¥tl 

RTTT 93-TRtRR-RTRt Rit 3TRTRR FR «h)s ^ STTTWT Ft% ^ RTR fRTTTt iRRTF 
^ TtTRTTT TTRJpf Ft% RTt 3TRTRT 4f RTtf Rf ^RT TRtRR ( FTRlt RT R^R) ^ 
fRT RTT iRRTF RTTR RT 3TRRT RTTRTt iRTTTt FTrf ^ TRR 4t RT RTTRt TPRRT 
tf TTg^ RRFTT ^ TRR tf iRRT RRT t RF RTT TFf Rit TPRirT TTRFTT RT^RT 
fRTTRTT fRT FTT RRTTT iRRTFTtTRTTT TPRR fRTRT RRT tl 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1349 


ANNEXURE II 1349 

(2) W #7# TO# M# ^PdRcW % PdMMM fM MI fMMIf MTOMT MPM-M fMMTr 
MMT t Rfa 'Hi 3MM c-dldd MTM M#f TO#MM MTMT Pdvdl MTTTT t , eft MM 3TMMMT # 
## TOfMM M# Mf 3TM# MTM MM TO# M# MTTM MMT cMpckOld W#M M ftpr MMT 

3TMTMM M# TOT # T7IMT t#MT MMT t^m Mf TO# 3TMM# 3TFJ MM 18MT M# TJM MT# 

MM # #MT tfMT 3##7 Mf# Mf 3TMM# 3TFJ M# MMM 3TMfM fl# MTT# 7# MMT# t# 
MI wq; #T MTM 7 #' PdPMd f#T# M# MM M# MMTTfM+lPlMT TO MTM iP/dlcM TOM 
#MT tfMTI fM MT7T3# # f#f#TO M^tItMT Mf fMTOT MlTO tl 

OTTift TOTCJ# MM TTTMMTTOm MT MM I HHI-mR M# MM OTI# 3TfM II 

10 / 85/45 

MMT fMMIHcpHl' MiMMM 7 JJ# <|MT I TIM M# MMT^fM MMJTMT M#TOI 

(SIMM. 14/1/43) 

### # Hcdl Ml MTOTM MfM MEM HMI J ldl t MMT MM TO -%tt .3T#TO #M MTO# 

## M-bll^il M«T MM ydPl Rbdl J ldl t PdM MM 37# 7TM+7T## 3TM# Tjnff 7 # ^TcTT 

Mild MMM7# MTMT# 3#[T <l#l tldl tl 

TO? MM fM f#MM #' f#r#M MM Mf MTOTO tl 7TM+7T## MM 37# 77M=fMMIM77 
( lid 7# fMMTM7T) 37MMT M77M? 77TM 7FM MTT# TOM# TO? M# tldl tl fM -Hm) # 
MM TO£ M# 77TO##M MTT# fM TOC M# 77¥l#t TOT# MM 37T#TO cT 3MMMM f#TO MMT 
t 37#7 37M# 7TOMT, #MT, MMM, MTM 37## MM 77TORMM# M# Mdc-dMSK 7# MMFM 
MM# 37MTO STM# fnff ^ MMMv# MM MM#MT f#MT MMT tl '"JfFl, MW Mf MHI 
MSTRT:l’ (Mi. 10/85/16) MMT '3Tiw^ MT^MrMTM Mrnjff' (Mi. 10/85/27) fTMlf# 
TMl Mt M5ft M# MM MTMt 37MMT M 7 ^ ^nfMMt MM# MM MM#MT M 3M#MT tl 
'MTiyiMHI MflmR TOT MtMTFM TfMM I Mr^MMMMT IMrMT TTMfRMMJMTM MMT ll’ 
3TM^ (14/1/42) 'TOTT WM M^fflT, ^ WTMMmP 8 TMT’ (3T. 3/78/2) fTMTf# MTOl' 
t tt MTJ M# MTfT MMT t fMT fM Mf# 't 1#M, W/IHdl, 7MMTM, MIMPM, t?Mt 
M# MMMMT MMcft MMM# 3MJMMT tl MM ^IM ¥PM MMfl M tHf (Mf#-Mr#t) 
MTM MMM7 Ml MM ^ q^JI tfl fMT MMM7 fM #11# t % #M felMf M^ if# MM 
MTM MMlf# fIT MMMM Mf# M# MMMf# MMT MM7M ^11 MTTMMf #' 7TMTM STfMMMI MM 
f##?T MM# tl 

MtMMMMTtM Mlftrd #' f#MMf M# f#Mf# M# MM 3T#MT 3T##' #' f#M |[3TT Ml# 
tl '3MJM TO#’, ThPjPmMT UMMTTOT PTOMliHdPMPd f^srfrT: 1 1 ’ MMT TciycUMMlt M 
fMTMfTO MTT#’ ( Mt MTMTMMT# MMT MMM#M#) fMTTf# MTMM f# MM MMMT M# 3T#MT 
MMf#Mf MMT 3MM TFS#' #' f#TMTf ## t f#TM# fTOMf M# 3TiMMMMM#M, 3TM7MMMM#M Tr ft 
MMT 3TMJMT MTMMM MMM# 3TTMMTO MMT MJM M MTM# MMTM MTMT MMT 

t, fMM| ## #M fMMTS MMM# M# MT# # f#MMt M# fj# ^ MTM M7 f#f#M 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1350 


1350 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


TTR 3 RFt RTS, RFFt Tf TpfRT ^RTTT RTT ^RT RTfsS RRffRT % fRT^T 
Rt 3TpdRRd R ^TTR Rt Rt pTMlld t'l ^:TR RTt RTR RS t % ^ fepff 

Rt RfR StRRT sftT 3TfRRRTTT TJRRT RTR RTtsf Rt SSRt' R RT iRTR fir f 3^ 
fRRRf RT RR RTRt fRRTT fRTRT RTRT t Rt SIR: 'JPff RT TJTR ^ ^TT RRTTT RT 
RfRRRTTTTJRRT RTRR # fRRTRJTt tl ^ ^ ^R fSRf 3RtRT TjfRpSTR RSFJRTRf 

RT Rt dlddld RTTRf %RT tl 

ffRRf Rf •RRPd R 3TfRRTTT Rt TRSPR R RTTTRtR ^ fRRTT RTT?t fir 
TRtRR Rt 7RRR RTt TTRfT RR RTt 3TTRRRRTRT tl fRR RT RTR: TTRt RjfRRTTTT 
R Tjof 3TpRRTTT wlohK fRTRT tl RJFRfd 9/194 R TRtRR RTT TRRR fTT RRTTT 
RRRT RRT t- 


F, RrtFT ylPdchMTui I Rj^RT^ fqf RTRT ‘R^fRR ffRRR T^RH, II 

RRfR fRRTS R7 RRR R 3#R R1 TTRSTT Rf RR TRt R7f fSRT RTRT t, Rfd Rt 
RR Tt RR fRRT Ri RT TRt RTRt ll RTT RRR RRRJTlfS "ft Rf RIR1 SfRT ll, Rfd 
'SR Rf TtRtRSTT RR R fRRT RTRT t RRT R1 i, RTRT sftT fqRT SR RRR RT Rt 

■gR? RPR sfRT t, RS 6 RRRT RR TRtRR RTRT RTRT tl RrRRRRRTRfR 2/143 R 

'■farf RTR Rfd ‘STTcIRtT RcR-'-RMHIrlH RTfRRRfRRTTRT RT, TRtRR 1 qRcFlIcfdHH’ 
W SRTtRT R TRtRR RR TRRR RIR: R^TRfR RT TTRTR st RRTTt fq 3TTfs RRR 
RR RRlR fRTRT RRT tl PdRRil ^TT^TT R fRRT%RT R fRRT^TR ^RR %®T t 
fRT '3TTRT VIo^H ReKydiRiq'I^RIRqRlJ^l|yRRyTkTtldi s TRt RR tT^TiRiR ; rRRRH s l ' 
(RTRRRRR TRfR fRRT^TR, ^RffRdt RTRT RfRTSt RtRR RffTR RSTR R. 842) STRfR^ 
3TTfs RT^ ^ RTR RR, TlffS RHRTR, RTR RRT 3RR RRRT RT RTRT RR, TPT tl 

RTTSTRfR Rt '3T e cRT^ c cRldl^PHcb', R^STRTRsNr RT ! Rlddd fRgRRTRT, 
■RdsTR TRitTR TTJRR III’ (RT. TR. 13/8) RR RT^f R RJTRfR RT TTRR TRtRR 

RR TRTRR RRTRT RRT tl R^RTR RP*T RR TW RR ^ RRT' RRfR fRTRT RRT t 

fRTTRR 3T«f RfR STR RRR tl 


fR TRtRR RT ffRRf' RR ^ 3TpRRRT RTR: TRfRRRTf RRT RRTRTTRRRT R TRtRRT 
fRTRT t, RSTRTTR 18/1 ^ RTRT t : 

TRf yRT-Mpyidl TRf TRTS, R#5T dd^RI I TftRR 'RTRTf 

RT^rfR^ R RT II 

3TRfR TRtRR RTt TRlPldl TRf tl RTTRTt 3T^RfR Tt # RfcT fRRtR 3TRTRT3ft 
R RTTRR RRRfR RTT TTRTRT t 3RRRT RSt I RRT RRT fRT fTT fRRR R %TRT t: 

'■R RRf ^R RT TJdt R fRRT WTTff R RT I 3TTRT% RT fRTFf RT, TRfR% 
RRpcfOJlc): ||’ 


(RTR RTR 78 TRfd RpSRR 282 RTTRTT RTRRtR 556) 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1351 


ANNEXURE II 1351 

C'l d sftr ShiR srftRTR Hpd , "JpT, pHdl , WcTT 

37Tf^ %7Tt ^ tl 

4UlRl<=b ?HT 'RT ^shdlfd 4/793 3 fFT MR RfRTT W t : 

dn'S’M I ch'^’M I qiRl , TTH[: Riq^sSp-lcii | ^chl^llIrMaloff , C’i&J ^l^llqch 

TJJrTH, I ( 4-Hfd-HK 60, -4^4)1 282, TRRTR ‘■TTHHRt 549) 

3R«lfa facflPsdl 3R8RtT 3H[44lP^dl ^TT Rfo of ftRTT ^ HR ^ 3R2HRT 3TR 
T4Tcn-fq?n ^ w 3 ^ ¥RT t rtM^hf ti hrt RrkrRHF 

*FT ^ fw H wwrff ^ w t : 

RldlRfcb EH Uixq', FoPlUll' WHHTfiHHmi EJWlTfdldyi'w^lgf ( II 

■HTdiPMcP) rtrt T^twf, Wf uRehlfridH,! foPFRT rpr rth ht, Tfdpz: Rsn^rcrfcni 

(^5hdlPd 4/792-93 =blr4NH^fd, ^H^TFT 76, HTf?T o|p*cf,| 282, WR RTtHffa 549) 

3R8ffa, /fKlpAjch HH H 'fepff ^Pf RRJ Tjnf Wd-4dl tl HRHfPf 3^R 

'RT 3fR RSTTHR •H^Pd-^ 3RTf^ ^ fWT H Rt RSpR H ^4 

TJjf 3#R7R 'll 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1352 


1352 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(ftr^ R)l-S fRRT RT IrRK-7 ) 

4-M-Mprl I^RT f cfc 3Tf^TT 

(RRTlI) 

xf. rrrtr' fsjuTcrrsrcirfrr 

RT?[R RTfe fRRT f feprf Rt TRRfR fRRRRT SffRRRT Rt fwi | RR #53 

' t JRfl I d-Sjcl RlT13Tt I It cJR<5 ch5l RRT t RR RR 5<cdWI I f^TT 'qjR 

TRfaTT SFJRTF t 3TR: RR WTRT It tHU^PR^ RR1RT TRfaTT 3TTTcR wflR RtRT tl 

RTT fw? f T’jfRRRTt' RTT It WTT RRtR 31RRR f_ fRRTRR: RTT fRRR R fe 

fRRRTsff RR R% R7t ReT 3|k 3TRTT TFqfR | 3TfRRRT TTtflR RtRT RT%R RaTRT Tjxrf I 
RRTRHRTat RTTR RjfR R %5RT t: 

RRf ylrH TTR^T, ftRl dR*^ ^rUUdtlJ 
TTT RRT chiHH^dlRiR^ rejisi RSdRTlRrl II 

(RTTR TRfR-°RRRTT RRTR R. 97 I R^R RRR) 

3TarfR R% I RRft R7f RR^RT It 'JR5 f|RT Rt RTTR) RTR RT RR RTT RR RTT 

RWpTTT RRRTR RTT RRRT Rl R1R I %RJ TSTTRT RT 3TRTR TRU I fRRR t Rl 

RR 3TfRRRT RTRT RRt 'll 

RR) ^Tlt RSTTR RT It 2/144 I RTTR I RRt RTR RTRt I: 

RPJRT W MIFRdil ^ iWTI 
llirl | RJ U| TdgTTRTT RTRTRT RT SRM I HR: II 

RTaitR RR TfRRT RfRRRTR RTctt fRRRT wIrTT RTRTT RTRRIr R% RR TORI RR 
RRRtR Rll RTTR> RRRTR RR TTRH RTTRt RRTTpRRRftlf R7l fill 

RRTRTTR 3T3FIT1R Rl 47/23-24 I fRRRT t :- 

iRTIR5fRTtRTR':, 1x1 SRTR' eh 

STRf TTEoT SR RtT 'RSUtI l)cfdH|Id I 
RtRTT RT MlddlRlSJH, RRRTtRRR II 

RTaitR R% RTt FTfH fe RR RRt RTt 3000 I 3#TR RRRfRR (RR ftlRRR fRTTRR 
RtR7 mRu|IH RR STlt RR) RR RRt Rt TIRR) RTRRR III sflT RR RfR R fRR 
RTT RR RR RattfRR RF I RRRtR R7T TlRuft tl Rfl RR URT RR R TRRfR RRRtR 
W STRtR RftfRRRRRT RR) RRRfR R7 %R It tl 

RRt RTR RtUdlR STatRTTTRRRT R- 

'31X[RT MfdVI'iH' RTTRRRTt (I^RMlM TRtSRT^ 3U 3R^ : ^JRRtfT I 3TRRSt % 

TltSTR^ | RRRTl || r|. 3/2 I RTRt tl 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1353 


ANNEXURE II 1353 

qqpf qf fqqqi qft srrgq^i qfq qft qiqfq ^ qfq qrr srfqqqr Rrtt qqr ti 
qqqf qqqm qq qqqt qqqfqqdRiiT qft fqqf i qrqqqqq qqfq 2/16 qft fqqTSRT 
qtqrr q qrr -gq Tfqq qfq qft qiqfq qq 

'rTFTK^TFT WqfdWRHRliqiHl SR hRuRdl T^f WJdl -HcbrlMd (jq | id I ’ 

qq qr«ff £RT qqrq fqrqr ti ;qqfq ptfed, qfa#ra 3 fqqqq qfq qft 

qqqqftqrr qT?qt qqft qnq qq qqq qqqt ti 

pT qqTR W/dcbuT qqT fqq^qqqff qq qqFR qqRq ^q fqqq q qcpq f| 3R; 
cdid^iRdi ^ qt qq qr fqqq arrqqqqr ti 

qft qffq fq^ qfte fqqr 3 qf&rq qroaff qr fqftqt f qqR ^ srfqqrcR qffqf 
qrr qq qrqqr il 1% ffqqT qpqfq qrr qq^q qrqt q srqqsf qfqt 1 ? 3?q : qqqff 
■prffqqqT ^qr 3tqr q qfqr 1 qq ft q qfqqr qqqff , qqp qq qt qft qf 
qTfq qhfti qqp: qq qrq apqq qr 3qqR qq q?q qqf yqiRid qtrrti qtqf q 
qqT qqqiaft qfr fqqr qft qpqffr q ■prffqqqq qrqr it', qrqr qTTn it fqr, qqfR 
qpqfq Rf w q -pqf ^ qt qfqqr ql^ddl qq WR: qftqq f^TT tl qqr qR 
qwrq qr fqq^: qq qrqt qrat it % ffqqf q ^qqr 3 qfqqrq fqTf^Rn t, qR 97 
qfqw srfqTf^q ti 3R: qq qqqq qq arfqqqr ^qT qq^ ffp aqqqT qifd ■*!{<+ 
■Rqg: qfqri qq -gfqq 3 t?t qqr q]qr qqtq t, fqp apqR -pqf 

^ qt qpqr 10 yfd^id qr qnrqq fqif^q afR qfq 5 T%f^q t aqi: qq 90 
qfqw qfRff qff qt q^ srfqqqr q ^qr ^qrf^q; 1 fqqq fqwiq qqqft qr 
qp ^fRq qqrwqq ^T. 3 qfq qqiRid 3 R^qq q 3 qqqt -jRqr (The position of 
women in Hindu civilisation) q q?' tpTTq qq®T fqT IRqqf qtf qqqfq RT 
tjqffqqrR qq ql %q %^t qq HHd.u^, qq ^qr qif%qi qq %^t qRqqr 
^ qRR qffqqq ^ qq arfqqqr qq qqqtq qq qn£\ 3 qq qqfr'i q?- qqqq -gff 
qt qqiqq qqtq ^ t fq^ qq qqqq wn % qf ^fqq qfqiRqqT Ttq qr qqqq 
fqqqf ^ qrf qT^ qtt qt qr# t qq fq^q qf qTqTTti fqqg qq qqqsq q qqr 
■pqf' qi srfqqrR qq qt Rp qfqq^r qpTFn ^qrqqqq q 'ghq? 

qqr qq qq qqiz fqrqr qidi ^ fqi qfq fqqqrsrf qff qfq qft qqr , qqq 
qNf qqtq qft thiRd f^qn qipir qt prqq ^qqqfq qft q'qiqqr 

q^q qfqqr ti qq : tpr qqnq qq fqrqr qTqT ti ^ fqr qt qrqqqqr qTRqr 
qt ^ qn qrqqt qr wR qq^ft ir fqrqr qT, fqr qqr qRfq q ffq4' 
qft ^ Tpqfq q qfqqrR fqq^ qq qq qffqrr 

q qt t#i qq WTq qt sftr Tqfqrqftq qqtq qtcn t qqfq qq^qq 

qqTqq qqqr q^qT ^ ^ ' :3 Wft ^ftt qqt qrqr qi qqrqn trt qqqq qq qt 
t fqr qqf qqqq qqT aqq qqqfqqqft q qf qqf fqqqiaff qft qfq qft 7pqf% 
qq Y ri tf' ?:T ^ t^TT qp aqqqT qqf i W^f qt ‘ 5R ^ # 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1354 


1354 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

■fe x ri% Rft R<r1 •HR Rl R f^TfSrRT fRRRT3it RiT guitlRRiK ift =|4 hM hRIRtIR 
Rrt gfe fir ti 3 trrtrt rr % RRfcr 

1%fRRT iff Rift 3?R ciRRi! Ri7 R l<rl ^4^ l +rll IISTT Hcilxl 4lcll 'I', RRT R1? 

3Rgri r iflRT ■% ^r fRRR ^ rRiri RTRRRt ^ rrr f?RT Rig? R^f rrt 

■dM^ri wtr Rf sfjrr r4 rifjr rr qRuim 3 ttrrrt 

RftRxfR 1%RT RT RRkTT tl fR f^PR RxRRrF RTtRRT Rif RRRRRTRT Rift I RTRTT 
t faRIRffld RPTRTRM ^R fRRR RT R^fRcIT ^ fRRR RRRI 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1355 


ANNEXURE II 


1355 


(%^ q4q fqqi qq cjq? Pq-dK-8) 


fw^ff cfr cn^TRTfq^TT 


-q'. ftWRTWrfo 


feprf ^ TFql% 4' 3 #re 7 K fqqqqT %TRT 3 Tf' 07 mqtq cT«TT 4 ^5 

Icmk m/d q? h^ki qq 4 14-<j mi-s fad q4 qiq 100 4 qq qiq qq cj>« PqqK 

qORl WT \ f4q4 fqq4 OOfadsPld RcT ^qfqq q4 qiqf4 q^ q4q4 q^ qwq 4 

fwr qqqi4 |II q? W Rl fe ‘OdOR - 5 # qq fqRTl ijq 4 fqq4 <4 * qW’ I 

41771% qq qTqfqqi fqqKRqq tTTTT 4 f 47 p 4 f %5 qKIdd 41 7 ?q 4 qfqqi 1%! 
rt qq 4 1 qqr qqi mei rt Tqi 4 1 % qq Tiq ^■hcihmI qqi 4 fqq 44% 07 

q% qq qqr q) qqi 4 i w qpqk f4qq 07 qqq 4 ^ 117 % %) 4 ^ fqqq 

fq%r 4r qqq qqqq wr 4 . i q% qqqrq ^qrqqrfTqi %t 4 4t qq qq fqqq 
feqi q%i i f4q r q? w qqjq qfte fqq q q# qf t fe ‘q?qq %t 
qq fqqqi 'jq qq qqraq qqq’ 4 qq qq qf q^r 4 qqf 4 , I qqrfq qq qjqqqqi 4 
fe qq qqqiqf qq 4qqi 7 %% 4 qfqqqq q4 w qq Tjqqrmqt, 7?4qi qqnTqfa qqi 
q4Pq?4 w qiqq 4 %, qq qq 07 -pqq^r qfqq fqqq q4 sftq qqqq qfqqqfq^ 
qfqq qrqfrqq qqjq qq i 

%qf qq 4qqr qqqfq 4' srfqqqq qqq qrfqq qr %p qfq qf 4 fqrqqq aftq fqqpq 
qq 07 q4 qnqqtq %7 4 qqqr fqqq qqqi 4% q4n i qq4 % 4' qfqqrfqq 
qqi fqqiq q qqa4 qr# %4f qf qwq 4' fqqq qqgq qrqqT i qq^ qqqrq ftcn 
q4 qqqqq -5# ^ qqq^r 4' afk sri 4' fqqifen ^ qqq^q 4' 1 

qqqq 2 / 17/7 4' fqjq qq qqn t : 


"qMiqpi^ fqqt : -q^j -qqft •qqpTKi qqqqqifq^ qqq; 1 
q^ ^ qqf qrqt ^q qiqf: 11 w q^q qq qt qNHNi4 snfq qq qpqqqq' 4 ^q 
qqqq qpq feqT t- 


^ Ipq 3qqr^ :— qrq^qTq qq qq 41 4-41 fqqt: q^q-Hidi-fq^^jf qq qqqff 
qqt: qTsrqqrqq qfqqqqqqiq: qqi ^P^m ( qqiqTq ) 3qqrq.* fqqtqq qqqiqqnq 
(qqq:) q?Tq;i 

qq qqqqrqq qsq qFT qi^Pri qsq fdldl^ qq q^rflq qq WlPMil, rqf qr^ II” 

?q qq qi?q4 qq t fqq q^q qrqqqqq qrqi-fqqi q q 4 41 q qq sm 
qrq qq qRq-fqqi q qiq?ft t ^q qt ^ qftqi ^1 (mow) ^ qq#r 
^ qi^qi qqqi ^ 1 ‘q4miN’ q/ qmiqm q. qaqq qqqt qfrqft qquft4 
4 ?q qq qqr qq ^qq?q qq^q qqq^ q. 1415 q q^q qqq fq qqqq qMq/ 
qq fqqi t, ‘qqjq ^fen ^qrqiqqifqqt qql %qi qqfq q qqr qqq qqq q/t 
qipqqqfqql qf# i 1’ 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1356 


1356 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

km 4 mmci: 4t IddRijfld p 44n % 4) fe4t 

4) f444r 4 tjphtt, mf 371k, cfft ctt?' 4f4R wrak ri 5 RT wi simi 

5rt kn4t irrt 4 fmR '■t mkr 4qf4 4 4 mr fwRT ^tt1%tt| 

fRW R TFITTI 4) dl^hMlI 4 fHHfdfeld m m ■gf^pff ^ w 

^ 77rri 4-' p^ti km 4- 

“ yn fi^c) f* 414 d 4v4 j 114 f4j*f ^tf4f4 ■HM'4i s i 

ftRTT m 4*4dH, wn^T m7ll<4SR4 II” 

(7R 3/31/1) 

^ P^cl m4 4 tj 4 ?4 4ldhMl4 4 %5H 4 : 

“ 37^717 7777TR idl^lPd ^dllilK fr^l” 

ml im 4-' <^ikn4 4 knu 4 : 

“11717 ^T5f 7ira\ ^niKl 777 ^MIUII Hr 378? <SdU^<Pti spffm:! 

3-l7dlH 3fff%r '^dHI'Jlldl (jJgd'dM dl^ieJrqH’wHrt <^4(4 I” 

3777k RTTT^ 7173 ^rsfl Rt dMI did 1 j4t Rt '?H ^TFT W\ 37kTR73 4, T[37 374 
4 p^tti m4 4 1 fTi w^\ 4 4ki 4 fk t j 44 ^4 4t m m ri 344rr 'll 

f37 TR7 Tfrr ■J7P2T ^r 4 fP 4t dlRbMl4 4 %7H I : 

krgH miRT kf4f4 TTRIr kf^TH 37«lk 4^ 4 kl^TH R7 37777! R77T1 71371 I 

^ 4p R7 kpTTR m I ?37R1 dlRhNl4 4) 4 37l4 ?37 7PR7 yRlMKH kfPTl I RT 

TR^T km 4t 4 37PRT Hdcd^J t : 

Si|ci4l^ u i f48JR7: TJ3T dididi ffrl I d^dgec^ ^(dlehi'^mMIdH. ^is-ds-id. Tkidki 
^ddidl^T '■did4 I 3717*77 4 'jddimki 77 ?Kd: ?id*i. II ffcl II 3if44l^ u i 'jdiu 
IT RPTl ^rafrT snfrl: 1 f48HHl' Pd^dldl TR: R) I d Mlldl i si 4) d II 

37«lfcl ''p 3fl7 ^41 4t4) ^4 dldR 7 ! R7 3TfddiK I 44 fe flRfdfecT didl 4 

3fR 7RIR 4 ^TIFTT RTT 4, f4pRl 3l4 ^ | fe ^ R7 77 i4t4r RR 4l 

R?7 RIcll 4 f4r 7J^ 37^-37^ 4k f^T 4 3cm 4tcH 4 3771: 44 3777^77 'k 'gRT 4 
7J^ 4f o|4f 7TR 4t, 37?' ’JTT 'jit kn T T7 77J7R 7P7 4 PFTTTl 4, ' I T?' cpFT R7T 
3P 14/9/4/6, wr W^T 1/5/17 ^TRiRiklfkr^ 6/4/26, 4447R4 W§l4fqf47\ 
2/11, WR7 P1HJ3 1/16/18, flPRRk) 3H7J5T 2/3/2 fc^TTfk 4 W RT7T1 4 I f4t 
^ 77I7R f4R PR H^THfci 9/130 4 4- 

TT^dicHi 77877 ' 3 ?: , 3^1 ^f|7T7 77177 I d^mHicnld ld'«'dm ^18 iH'4| SF7 II 

37«kl ^ 3TT4 371CRI ^ 77I7R Itcll 4 ‘jit ^ ^ 7TTH Itcft 4 I P77 37lrHlcimM 
3H R 44 ^ 37R <44 ?7R 4 77R7TT 4 ? 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1357 


ANNEXURE II 1357 

3FPTFFT qf 45/11 f H^Pd qq qq^RT qqftqr ft q^T feqT W t I 
qqrtqr ft PdijckicRK aii^hTh f qqrqpgq q^ qr ffqq q q^q fqrqT t q 44 qq 
34 f qq t fqr qqqwjq q^ f 34 ffftq in jhihm qq f sIr - 3 # ftff qq 
qH^RK qiq qiq f 34fqqq4 ft?TT t ffq qfe qf qRtq q qqFTT I qqrqrgq q^ 
qq trit qq fq f- stt^r qq ft ffT ^tt ffq fqffq Phi? 4d4>K f frraq df^4^d, : ’ 
qqi qqr qft q^q ffqT t i 

Pdi?ckichK qq qq qwqqi qrsfqrqf qf qrq qqr qf siffqqq qf qaq f qiq ffT 
t qqfq ‘q ^ffqq qqfqf’ qq ffra qqr q^fff ^qq qsq qq qrtff qi w t qt q? 
qrqf I fqr qrsfqrqf qq qiq qiq f 3#rqiR qq' t i q? ffiqf qft 34iq?qqqTT ffr 
“fkqT: qqqffsRqTffTOqf ffqRl q ijq:'’ srqfq fqqqf qq qiq fqrqT qrai f, qff 
4qi qmi f sfR qqqq qqsqjqiq rift qq ffdi ^imi f 34qqT “ <1 *-h 1 q WrTT 
qrrcqrffr q mhPhh ” srqfq 4 ft (qqqr) qf qcqq frq qq qft qfqr ffqr qmi f 
■jpq (qiqiqr) qft qff, fft qrar ^fqqqf fqq ft qq feqfq qqif t % “dWd„ 
qrqiq: 3Tqr qiqT 4ftffr 1qqTq% i” srqfq ijqq qft ft qrq qpT qq srfqqqq 
t 4 ft qff qft, qqqft 34^841 qf fqqqqqrR 4I4 ^ni 4 qq 34qqi qq 3ifqqr qqrqq 
qqpq ftcn f 1 ^%^ffq qqr qff: 1 qq qj. 3/31 qq qqq qqr qq 3 ^ 

qf qiq qrq qf 34fqqri4 qq 44qfq t qf qqt 4jqq ^ ^ qq 'q qr^t qnq^’ 
qq qlqr fqq^: 344 ^Tqididl 3 qrqpn w wtq qqf im 1 qqrt' qfq 3ifqq7 
4'qididl qiq qm Mfqqf qq qqqi qgqi t 1 ‘qiqq:’ qq 344 qiqi-fqqi ‘qff’ qq 
34*4 fqq qq^ qiq qqqq4qt 34qRq qfte qq qqp qqi qjq q^ qq qrqf 
34 qfq Ph u s qiqrr 'jqq 3^(4 <^<1 ^qq srqi^q qrqft qqt f?qTfq 344 qrfqqq 
qq4 q^ t 1 fqqqqqqq ^ 34qqr q^r qqqf fqM q q w q fq^T qq qq 
fqqi t 1 qqpqq qft % f44qft ^tr^tt 34Rq, fqqi qqi qqnq T^nfq ^ 
qft t, fqqqq qfqqt qft qm q ^ 3 qfYf 44^q q fi 1 ^4 4 54 qqq4 qqi 
ft 4jqq f qrR4 fqq^: ft 34ifqi t‘, qw qqq M M qq qqqq t ? 

qiqqNi4 34iff qqqqqq qqffqr qtqfqqr fqqqf ^ 4 3441 : q^ftf m fqra ffqi 1% 

rMU^Hlffcb^l'^ Mfldiqif: ^iffTT W8JT q [3/31/2 4TTqqT «M] 

34«itq Tjq qqffe qq fqqrt qft iw fqi t fqfqiq; qq qiq qpT qq 34pqqqft t qq^ 
■ 5 ft qft fft fqffrq qqqft qiq qiq qq sifqqqi; qft i f^ft ft qiq qrq: qqt 
qtqffqr qqqqqq' f %# t i qr?4t' q ferqf ^ qfq 34 ?qqT ^5 qiq qqrs qrrf 
fq; qqqq qiq qpi f siqfqqqr qrqi t i fe qq^qft tqqnqqqr f 363 q. f' 

ffniT f , “qffqf qqq fqqiqr qrfqr fqffRqrq/qiq” qqfq ffqqf qq qrq fqqm f 
3ifqqq4 fqffR qft qqffqr f #?qqp4T ftft t i 

qfn^q qqrqqq qpfq qqiq q^qq qfftq qfqq f qq qrqft qf qwp qnaft 
ff ?p[ ^ qrq qrq q fqqrg; qft ■jfqq ft i qrsqft qft ft fqqT qf qrrs 

qqT iw-qn 34Tff f qfrf qrq qff fft qr^qf qr qnq ffqqft ?q qqfqf 
qiqrq qqqr ftrq f qrq qrq q sifqqrq fqr qfqT 34^fqq ftqr (fnT ff^ qn 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1358 


1358 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

qqM ftqte q. 130) PcmrioI w# 3qfq 3 pw q qfwr 

qRqfa 4-HlcH q^Riqi wi 3Tt7 qTsqt ^ q# 

"3ft 3HH'-i fwr qq ?HI«S 'I el <=h<q| ^<J<=h •HrPtI =h)^ qFl q pH<rMI qiPeq I 

(iN+Plil q. 129 ) w q^R qft Phhik ■gfqqqr qfr qfcrfqqr f^nrf qq 
3TTp9RT il =bei cRT cfl°h i|' qq f^pSTR-^fteT W1 Pl u lq ^ I 

q. qrsqq qmqt cnfccM q qfeq ^ qif ql qqq qrqifq 3 «tft qqf ^ 
fqqq q fq*q %qR qff qikPlN, R=ieK qRR, 4 tki^ ^ q. 1415 q Rgq 
%qr t : 

% qq nw: w T^nifer^TT q qqw i” (qpqr Rjfq 3/57 qqR 

7T%cTl 7/6, AdMupl rt1%cTT 1/10/4, rlPd/ld TTfqqi 18/6/1, RcNq Wq 2/6/2/9) 
qqi qt qf|q ^ qif ^ qqq qrqrfq qiq qq m fq^?T ti 

“3m?ter q*r TTfq yd mi Jidf^Pid -*r% smhi'h. r w ^ P'4-nobl fqqqq 

3/4 q oqiteMi qfr q? i qqiqqq qqqr qq %qr qnqfq qPf qrqr qqqt qq iw 
fq^qi t fqqqq qrq: tr qqfqqf qt qq^fq fqqq qqr t ^ % qqqt 
q q^q qjRifq qqqf ^ qrsqPf qrr w ^ qn^qr i 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1359 


ANNEXURE II 


1359 


(fefel ohls Rid fe fq-ciK-9 ) 


iwff cftf ■STT^TFT 3ftT TljfrPTT 
fe. suffer f^rraraFifri 


5 R fe fe wrt fe wn fefe wr wfe fe wfe fei ffefei fe wp wit 
WFcTT fe I 

HjfePd 9/118 4 Rife wife W W fe : 

fefenfefeWT cb-mfe: feWfeTR: TJSR5 | fefe^TdfeRErg^fn , gfdd: i-cHpdrHci: II 

9 / 118 ) 

srafe ■qifef’ fei differ fe wr anfe ffefe fe fe Rgfe w fe naiRi w fe garni 2 wnfef 
srafe; srafe srfwffe fenffefe fei fe i fe n fern Rife fe nffer wfe wo; I 

Wl rw WTTfef WT qfei 3 R^fe W fefe fei afeHR 1 W cfaTT yldMlRd fei 

rrrwr Rjffe 2/12 fe fei nfet rrt 

31Ufe*>dHd fefchlilf ^TTgffe: M'uffef*d: | RfnRSR- iRW?W*TpRT?f ^ dfeilW II 

WT Wife £K 1 Wt T\i fe I WT wife fe) ffeT^Tl feWT fe ffeRlfe % %RT fe fe '3T%R1 
^IfemlRi ifegRsfefew^TiffeR feffe i Rafen fnfe rt?t fen fe fe fen fe) rrj fe 
■qwfw gffefei wr fe rr rft 3 3ifwi fe i fet fern fe snfe %rt fe fe “rr IddidVife 
d/idchM fer grfafefecrgniTT fefw r° 4 ^fefe rutwr i ngddd 

(qPiyTri i d^'iu^ P-idh^ RSRHRifeRTffefe' r 4 ffeffe^ fferr g^ild d4°i nrofe 

ldvlWddWMlldldw4MdclSIH. I” 

( fedT^TT <ilchi ). 

srafe w' fenfe fei fean ffem fe wr fe ffe w f wwi w srfe n wrt w -fe few 
fe wMwRfefe) w'nfewrfe.Rgaf w fe fe nfe) fefffe fen mfe fe wjprffe (9/118) 
fe ddd fe ffeRR fe nm/n i fe feg w? wrw fe fe fen fe) ijrg fe rtr wrt rti fe wfe) 
wife fe rPrw fe 1 feffe fe fe fe fen wn fei fe fen fe w ^fe fe wfi fe 
1 ffe/few fewrfeci fe qiRdid rtw gyRi4 war fe wwwr ^gfe fe fe wife 
fe) felfel fefe fg Wfe t ffe 'fePl-tJVd dld-|fefe:l ^pHldlMfef^dHi 

IfefeF rm^lVdgsffefe wm I ” (fe MlR'dld 648 ) 3 fefe * fenfeWl ’ feTTfe 41 ?fe 4 
feR wt m?qfe agg- f % fefefefen fenRife wr fnw few w fe ffe wrfef snfe w 
WT fean fefeT fe I 


fe fein nn wfe f ffe fenfe fei Rga) 3fe few ffew-fewra) ffej wt 

t, fe fei WT Wl Wife gg Wlfefefm fe 3nfe ffelT f ffe “feER ife Tfejfe, 
MctfnvRrm 'Ergsffew ch-gchlti grqi fefeg' Iqqig; chdcfel R 'g ■Huffed S^ui lqc)l5 
feT Tfedfe wafefeRrrffeffe rfefeffefa) Pm d 1 8i / 1 ch 1 / 1 4i h 1 m h P^i m d rd 1 d frgi u H <n 4 1 ” 

(fe mR'did 650) srfen wfe few wfe t ffe gfewr nw wfe fei aw fean 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1360 


1360 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

fqTTTT ^RT RTff k RRRT fqRR RTR1 Rfqi R % U,RPdd R TT^R! RST k 

fRRiq Rrrqf far ^r^fr fqrnT ^tt RTfqi i qq m TfRifqpq, fRdTRTTRR 

PdRI^cR q?RTfR Rf qf4 Rf RTTR RifRT Rlpf R^R t I oRRqiT RRXg 

(^af RtfRfq R. 1420). 

RRTPq^t RIRR W4R4q TRffT Rf RfRT 4' Rf Rqf RTR Rqf Rf t fR 

“ P^ d rh Pi - TRR ■grpREj^T dd=u ri^q Iqeiiq: <*>l4f R 1 H4jTdd'*«l , J| 

fqc(ig)o?ldld RT TJSTpTRIT^: I d-Hfl OU-S^ld I R RffR M^d ^?ll'Gim<4 s oMq^ldHd 
dmR^lldl^ThHMK-dH. I” ( ®l I H *-R <i_Pl — F)4ctTlq TJ. 1421 ) 3TqfR Rf Rq Rqd 'f fR 
rfr Rf RRqfffq k ^rt rrt ^rtt ret) k fRRTq rtrt Rif qq; r fR rrr 

k fRRTq WR RTTT RT R)RT RTR RRR fRT RTfqq RRRf RR RT ‘Rq’ qTRTfR Rf 

qrrr ftqT^RiRR 4 tr^rr fRRT t i rrr nP/Rid 4 3 rr if qf qq fqnq fqqr «tt 
fR ‘3TRRT <fdMK k fRTRfr ^RRTRT qf RTknf RTTRR Rf qTTTf TR^gR qf RRTT t I 

w f^RR Rf fRTRTT 4' Rff THMydRdl ^PdO, if % RTR: RfTrfRR 

qfoqq R^wjfq 3Tfc R1RRRRR wf?T if 1W UPdllPld RT^f RTR if RT RTRFf RfRRT 

fRRTq 7TTRRTT«f RRTRTT RRRRlR RT RTR RTTf t RTTRff PRTTKdl 3TfR 3TRRTsf?TT 

fRSTRt Rif TRT7T if RF) I 3TR qTT WR if' 3RR RRcRlPd RqRf Rf I 

(7) RITR TffqTTT 14/13 4' %H7 t :- 

^^IRl’yMsfRRTf ^R:, cbfdRilRIeH: RRTT: I TmiyiRTR: ffRT: TR[: , 3 TRtTT RpRHi 
7TSJT II 3TRf?( RTRT Rf <JR> 3RT 3lfqR fR dllsy,, <HdPl qfi Rf R-H I ?fq 

Rfqf 3lk 3lPqq|P^dl Rffq Rf RIR RRR R%1 I 

RR aHpcfcdP^dl RfRr Rf %R RRfq if ^ q^r ^ RTlRf qf RIR R4 ^ 
rt fqqR ■§ i 

(8) RRRIRT qgfq 4 fqR ?RfR t : “ch^lchHl' WdHI; R^sf! RFT I 

IRRT R RRtRFTT:, RTR RTRT&R RJclR ||" (^§f qrq 414 69, RqfcT dPRRI 268) 
R?lfl 3Hp4dlP^dl RRIRf RT %R RRfq 4 RfR RR TRTT t #1 'jqf RT 3/4 I 
RR RR RT sfteT Rt qf RRT3ff RT 4f l^t ^ HHN RT RT RfqqTR TRR ^ | 

(9) RRTRfq RTfq 4 RTT fqRq 4' %HT t fR 'RqRI% 1 RRR, rl HR li> 1 44 MlTvi Hi I 
WT1 RTrlR^rf, d/iRl'yil R RRR ll’ (RR RR 69 fHPdUK 57 Rk PHdfdd 
2/117 RfRfR R. 1413) RRfq iRR Rf RRf RT RTTRf RTRt RT RTR 3TRf TTRRf 
^ RTTRT 3Tk RRT RT ^R1 #TT RT%1 I 

(10) IqrajRqfq 18/34, 35 R %11T t : ‘TTTrTr^R RIRHHRUI R|J|^|Ruq : 

3TRRTRR ^d<:ll" (R1R RTR 68, TTTTRff fqTTTTT 357) RRfl RTdT RT RTR IRf 
^ TRJTTIT qfRT t 3Tk THPddlRidl ifRRf RT Rf 1R 3RR RJT RT fqk TTTTRff 
fRcRTT 1 361 3TtT R^RfR, RRRR RTR, TTdTRf R. 1416 4 fRRT RR tl 

fRl ^ RTR t fR '3RJRTRmRifTfeTTTRTkqfyfr 4Moi4:l’ 3T«lfa Rf ifRR' 3Tpqq|P^dl 

Rf 3T«rqT 1r4rt r fqqqi qf rrr TRRfq k k fqmT rt%r;i 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1361 


ANNEXURE II 


1361 


(11) <^kld Rjk 7/256 k %RT t : ^1^51 dOitl'yi, SRR I 

R TRiRR tj <1 lid'll II 3TarfcT *R k Rfpff RTf 3RRT RtRT 

RR ^ I fRR fk/k 31RfR ^ RSdR R Rt' I 


(12) ^RR /-kid k Dh ddd Hldl RRT «TT Id <3 RTR RR 175, <r^Rl RfRRTT, 
268, kdPdkk 59 3TTk k RgR RR t : 

jpimyEr fq^rw^r kk ^ch%cf 11 pteft 3Rf ^PidfkcbicbK % rf 
fkiRT i -fk Ricii^y >U)^ cjV SR RRmR: fggRoEn^ kRR, 11 3rajf?^ RgRBif Rk fadis 
■% fRTT SR i%=F TTKTfrr -fif ^TT difp I fRR cdd^K ycbiyicbK % pT 3T2f 
RT *=)U£d cRRf 'p; fRRsIT t fk ‘TRpRTf^RTRRig RgRT^y^Pd ^dcMHM-j^Aui 
7TRFIT MldtMiiiPl RRRFri|cr IRT^ 3R W: 5RT«r: f*R ^oU^i|f4-|fH RSPT 

fcrfsj: I TRET TTRra^STREf^sgfyrRT&d' I dcJlftcfcdk: R RR fRfq- TJ8R fcrfsT: 

dRI^I ^dlf^ob R 7#SR Vlg-dddflMHIsfrRT I 

cdHsdld yigddd fdilKUdSfl' Rrk: miyi< fjk dlcbldlH-^'fcd^fdRFT RJRf 

Wydk-rl^t llPdRRpM <4>«4iyiH)d'lkll3 yr^ ^frT I Rfk ^ ^dlP^cb fddl^MdlPl 
fqgcST cFRmRf ^dPkrMSf: RIT^ clkdd fRF wfefrT TJRR, MsigST^R RtFR; I 
RRRT^fF^ cdHsilHMId^' RrJ fddltClMdrfc RoR M^rtldPldH, II 


(°4dSk 'ERTm 456/457, Rtkk R. 1422) Rjf?T dPskHRk k pT RER 

ERT "JR k ajsf %R t % RR^rrsff Rt ^RR Pdctl^ldVil R°R fRT kt TTRIr 
k k RRT RTfRT 'JR klRT Rift i| I RR Rl fRERR ill RR) Til RR 1% RRRT3T1 RTt 
%R SR RrT RT%R Rf d^JRPd 3RfR k 3RjgR %ggr f | ^gfl MR RR 

t fe RRRTarf RET iRRR^sM R5R ^ Rlfp ^ % Rf 7 Rl1% R( ^RRT RR 
t 3RT«n RFfR 3lk fdW klRI ^RTl ST^f RFFl RlR f fe 

EFR3Tf Rt ftdl Rt RRfR k k ftnTFfT (Rt ^ RT r)«H RR kf) kdT RlfR7 3lk 

Pddi^idkn kk ri%ti;i 


(13) LiclHpg RJ% k 4R % 'RJRTT cl'cfl'l^eh 7R(SR R RRct l’ C^RRirfRi 
k cTSTT S3qcRKT«f RJ5ER 129 k Rfikk R 1422 k ^5?T) 

ag^rfcT RTRT pctdl^ldkil ^ST afk SR k aHPdP/ckl mu k TRtsR Rt M R7 I 

(14) RJRRK k fRR RER RTfkkRRl 268 affc odd^kk RJERT 129 k ^?T 
%R TFTT f :- 


RTJSlfyf 7R RRTT II 3Rlk; RRT Rf k fkk k 

4?i 4FI k %R RRfk k k WR I 

(15) RRRk RsknRT 3/5 k EfRT f %, 

flR8f ^3RR: TJ5IT dP^dk RT Sjf^^ Pdcll^ RTRT: II 

ag^rfcT RRR dk fRT ^ R 4Tt RdR fdRRlRfsT k RR ^ afk TjfRRT RR 
R^'l 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1362 


1362 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(16) ^*ni 4 4 arcpft Rrfo r ^4ird ^ rut ^ w rrt t 

t % ■rrrtoftt ^ -^rr: rt ^ ir^RT: i cfrtt, 

dTPf^Rd rRghTT^ II 

(^sbdlld 4, 5, 299) 

3T«lfd( ftrcTT Rft TFqfd tpf 3TR fePTf Wf RRR 2 RFT Pdddl RTfeR 

i ^rrari' ^ *tft stmt sfrr wr 4t stmt i wi 

3RT Rt RfcT ^ RRR 4-Hfd4r W 3RR TF®ff R RRqTatf ^ ^ 4 3#RFR 

^ HIM, 'dlci f f^RJ =b~4l RTT RFT YR : "JR r) fs-ir-H I dldl T RT 1? 

i fR yrtT' tT yy rT iw t % yy R^rrarr' ytT ttr1% 3 3 yr 

Wt YYT y 4P=H?4 YT TJYYPTRt Y#f t I fYYY X R 3RY ^fWf ^4 fYYR Y 

3RT^ <4<SI Y dp 1 1 | 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1363 


ANNEXURE II 1363 

(%^ fRTR RT f^TR-10) 

■qfM cfc ^^TRTfTOTT xrr 

(Tjrftf) 

xf. %j4^c) rd^iicii^wrd 

^ RR 4 ^FT^FTTfeTH ^ 4 16 WFl £KT MrR ^ 

4 %R1 RT l|RR t I 3FR r) 3TRR WI fR fw 4 3RFFR ^ f %RJ fRRRR 
RR ft RR -HdRil RRFfll chid I RTF RiRR Rift 1? I Rjg- %fed Jrdfd RR fdH Rdd 
fR fRRR 4 RRRR RFefclRtR t fRRRR ^ fR^R RcF R^RR 4 %rt ^TT l|RR f:- 

(17) Rimiir ^RTTRflf ^dll^eh, RjftSRR RT oFRT I” 

fR RR 3l4 Rg ■§■ fR7 RR RJRRFTlfR RR fRRFT %RT RTR eft RRRT 'JJRTR, fRRTRIRRFTt 
sFR Fail RRtRR RTt RTRT Rif I RRfRRfRIRR 269/270 4 1R R1RR Rlt ^WTT 4 %5H 
ft, “HldPlIqRlI^HI'l oh -Ml , ^qilgch RflxnwfeSR' R^tSFT RT, Pd n l fc^ ^xf 

Rt4?tffr I” R^T ^JR Rf Rc^ RTR RR Rt RTfdRfRRRRIR ^ RRFFI RR f^T t I 

fRRl Xfft RTqfR 4 Rg4 RFT Rtf R7 3#fep RTRRR RR <q\ R7 3#TRRR RR 

R|[R RTt RH/dRl' RR1 WRTRTTfR 4 yPdMKH t I RRT?RRl4 Pd^RMPd ^4 fRJR RRR 4t 
RRTRRsIRR TpRR Ifflt fRRTTR 4 R^R fRvRT RRT t RT^: chMUl RRR llcf I 

(TTOdcft fRRTlR R. 382)1 

RRtcT H Id I R> S,°R RT ( 4) d ch Rl -4l -<4 1 P-cj d Hi oi 84 ep 4l dR XJr^ rT^ RT^) JHiRr) 
RR 3TfRRR7 IRRl 1? I 

(18) H jRlid 9/192 4 RTRRR fRRFT RT fwi 4 RFR t: 

“RRRTf RffSTRIRT Tj; RR R^ Wt^TT: I RRtT^ Ml'^eb*^ fferaR( Rp|-dyd RRTRR: II” 

STRtR RTRT <£ Rdf RR RRRf RR RTf RTf sfk R%R' RTR ^'| 

(19) d^WPd 7Rf?T 4 W f^lR 4 %5H f- 

“WtSFT d dM tR H I , ^fpiT ddTyidl I 
3TgrTT ^dHi^l , RT«T% MUmdch^ II” 

“xq TR^T ^iPld) tTT^, ddlc>^i (Ros^Hgld I 
SHMrdfM Sjqjw^ 3TRl4PMdohJR RT II” 26/108 
“•qi ^tTT fold'd! W, ^ TJrt TlIrT I 

7T*W ^r4d, ^4)o4cW' % c6HU|^ ||” 26/109 
“WldRl fRRRJ JR , q4ri| JdP^dl: RnTR I 
wrft % R1 TRJW:, Rpl-MVd WW: II” 26/114 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1364 


1364 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

FT ^ digl T FTT 1 ? fq» qq iJcT qqf qf ’jqf qq sldl 1 ? sfk yfl qq 

qf qqtf' qFT -gm I qfq RF qfqRT%q qf I PcMlpidl qq 3 qf TTR ^ qfqRTSif qR 
W 7 T qq qRRf t I qfq fqrqff qq qi^ m RR TTf qqiqft qfRT qq qf RFR «R 

3 *ift fiFHT ^ni%TT | ^nt ^ ^+ 1^4 Tf'<ff|^qfqTqqf, q^qfqq^fqq 
qq qq qpr qq qftR qft P-Mdi difey, qqffqr d)di qf rr qq tir y,q> iff il i 
qqR ^ ffcreft ip %tt qRfq qff qr^-Rlqq fqqr qq: qfq qfi 

qRRRqq 2/117 odddKISTR %RT t:- RfR rTT«T 

^FcR: ”i fq eft fimT^nr °qrw 3 fERFftcq % f^nn t — hm^-hh, Rift 
^^qmcb^ullq q djgd PR: JtiunqR^ 7 J 'jguH^RId I ^etn ftrRf m h i r xj 

qtfSRf # 3 , qffqRTRlRcif fRRT: firT qrqcRcTRT Tjf^tj RTfRlR qftsR T^ifllq 
fcRpR ujsmiIh fqqRRRRf TJ%iJ RT^rRTTfqfrr I TRET dld^ld df$id: I 

“qftSR ^f^Uirq; 3 T 0 fM* 57 TRT 3 RMrRT R” ftcR 28/25 II 

qqfq rth qr qqq ft cfl qqqff -^qqqi ^jft qq qqftq t ftqft qq qft i 
qqq qq ^gqq qq rt qq qft qqqff ftftqf ft ft i rj qf qRqjqqq RftqrftT ft 
nidi qf srqqq qq qfqqr qiq ftft ftf qqqq qftqq qq <qftqrqf qq ftft; Phcii qf qq 
qq fjft qq qfqqr srfqqqq qtrn t i w fwr 3 qftq ft qq qqqq fftftq qqfqr t 
fqr ‘qftqq qfqqTfftn ftft qyPdPkidi qqqi fq«Pn qRfqrqf qn # i i' 

(21) qqf ttr qqrqqq qq qrq'q t, qqrqqq 3 qjqrqq q^ 88/22 qrqr t 

‘ 3 Tqrrqqq qqqTff, qqsrffRqt f^,:ii 

qqfq^ fqqR qr| q qt ^ qq fqqi qft qqqt qqqfq qq srfqqqq qt?n t 
^qi 3 qfqr 3 rrqTqf qq qq t i feTf) fqqqft qq qq qq t fe qqqq 3 qq( qqqfq 
qq qpqqqq f i 

(22) qqq qqfq 16/50 ^qft qqrgqq qf fqqq q qq t 1 

‘qqmr^ ^ ^fpq, qRjqRRqqrRiTT 1 
qsnRT ^Igdi 'Eftqff, fq^: qTRRqqqqfl' II 

(qqqfq q^qfen 14/47) 

qqfq Tjq r qqR q ^jqf qq d<jqi qqqfq q i jq srfqqqq qfqi 't fqi qq qf 
fqqi qff ^ qf qqqiq qf qqqR t 1 

(23) qqrqqq q^imdM 4 45/12 q %ri t, 'qi^r rtritt ^qirfqR 

TTR 7 T: II’ 

qqfq h id 1 R qq qq ^qiqf qq qpqqqq qf?rT ■§ 11 

(24) qqqqfq qqfq 26/132 ^ q/qr t- ‘qi^ff q^fqRr, ^91^ tttt i rrtsrrt 
rt TgKQ, fq^fqirf ^ qq 11’ 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1365 


ANNEXURE II 1365 

sratfcT qft ■5# fqqr qt qqiq ■Jjqqqf qqqrq qrat arqt mf qtR qfq ^ 
whisI T Tf iff , qTRt hRi5icii ?t q? fwr qt qrq qqr q qfqchiRujl ?tqt ft qif' 
qft "jq ^ qq q qnr qqr ?t qr q?t i if 3-cmI qq Rqq^j ft Ri^k 

qrqt qq ?q ^q qfqjnqf qq qfqft i-(i) qt qqqnf arqftqq q?rqf qq qpff 
qjqqT aqfq qft qq?' qqqt qwiPqqi q qpqtq qfqT q aqqt qft qqRq 

qq ^ qqqq fqqr qft qqqfq q -gqf qt qqq arfqqqq ?tqT t sflq q| aqqt 
fqqfqsf ijq qt qrqrq RR fqqRT qifqq; i qfq q? qfqqifqq q?qr fqqft qnqtfqqr 
qtqifq qq qqqq ?t qr qt fqqr qft qqqfq ^ ^qft Tjfqqt qft qm fqqrqr qifqq; i 

(2) fqqT qft q^qjq qqnq -gqt qq fqqr qft qqqfq qq aqqqt qrqT qt ?tft 
fq; qqn£ qqiqq aqqsq arfqqqq i i 

(3) qrfqqifqqT qqqiaff qft fqqT qft qqqfq q qr?qf ^ ti qq qfqrf aqqT 
fqqrqr qifqq %q q^. qrqqqqq, qrqq, ^qqr, qqqqfq, qqqqrqq, fq^ q^qiqtq 
aqfq qiq : qqf qqfqqqqf q qnr t i ^*ni 4 qqqTaff qft -jqf qq aqqT qm 
ffqq qqqfq if qt q^qiqt ti 

(4) fqqifqqT -gfqqt qft qt fqqr qft qpqfq q qrfqqqq ?t ?qqq qqsfq qqqt 

qTqt qtqqr qtq qqq ifft q aqq f i ^ qt qq fqqifqqr ■jfqqf qft q?f 
^qqr arqfqfeqi qqfq^ fq?fqT fqqrfqqr 'jfqqf qft fqqr qft qiqfq q q I jqf qq 
^tqT qiq qf fqqpr t i 3 qqq fqisopqfq, 4qqq^jq aftr qqqrfq qqfq qt 
t iqqqft qq ?qqf ^ ^ q^q fqqr t i fq^j qq qqq qt fqqqt q 

wi\ t ?q qqrq t:- '3T^Hf 3qrfqiwf qqfqfr qqfq arfqqifqq afrr 

fq?fqT Tjfqqf qft ?t %qr qiqfq if ^ qiq fqqiqr qrfqq; i ^qftqg: qqiqqqqffqqrqt 
qrfqqiR fqgR qqqrqtqrRTq q. aqqqqRrj qnqqt ^ f?^ qn qrqqt ^ qiq^ qiqt 
^q fir qr?r qi % qrqqqqqqqfq qft ^t rhrt ^ qgqR q^r Tjqf, rt# qq 
fqqif?qr ?t RqqT qrfqqifqqr, %qr qrqfq if ^ qtt«t qqr qft, qt fqqr? fqqqqr 
^ q^ qrfqffqq ?t, arfqqqftqft t i (^qt f?\ qn qrqqt fqfr^ 1947 q. 32). 

?q qq qrat qft qn q qq^ ^17 itq fqqR q? fqi qrfqqifqq qqqTatf qft 
■jq ^ qm qq qtqr^ %qr qrqfq q q q^sq qrRqqiqq aftr qfqq 

i 1 qq^ qPciRcw fq^n PRiP^di ■jfqqf qft qt %qr qiqfq q q qm qrq qq 
wq^qq srfqqqT i, qqfq ?qqt fqqqq qq% if RrqRftqr qTfeqi^qf 3Rqq f 1 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1366 


1366 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(fd^ ohls fd<rl X R fRRq-ll) 

■qfNf cfr GO^TFiTf^R ■err 

(qqqd) 

xf. Icj^lcd-ol^lri 

qq^q fd^ drs fdqr d Rdtqqdq qq fqqr dt dsfdd dr dsdf d ror dt 

R d qqqiR t Rfd d qTRR qd ^ RTffd dq dSpchd Rf fRT dt -HJ-Mpd 

d d -jpff d qrqrq qrq ffcro%, dd dt qndd 3 dt fdddn q?qt r afen 
d, -h ici i d qdqq d d 3rf^r^T qrq a^qii d dt r rtr qrdq ®nq y did qdl 
ddt I TR Rdd d dSfdd dt fRT =HH1 r R fWT dt •HRPd d Tjqf d aiTR 
qpr dt r top fdqr R fdq| rr qrfdfd (ddro Rdd) dr add qqqd 
d qdtq dd i % fdtq dt yPdRhqi i p 1 d dsdt d tort dt r 

fdpR rr rt fdrr fdrd qq fferTWjd P Rrqqqqq qd rr qtRdi Rjq: 

d^TT Rqd Rdld ffro|, dd fdq d fdrog: anddq dr arqqnt w Rid d 
riri di qfd d r d^qidi d q^q qnqdtq Rrdf dr d qidr fq; afrq 
Rjq * i:f chl<P d | ^ rgdlR R qrq dqr qrdRi dd rgR ddt qRjqTd d 
RFRjqR dSpeh^T R fRTT dt RlPd d d dS=hT R dtR qFT dt R WR 

dt Tud df fq fdq r irt fdtq q dd r ■gd fdRR di aqi: dq aip 

dt fq fdp d toto qddr d qrrjdq fqdq t fd d dsfdd dr Rftqq 
dfq r Idcn dt qqqftr d ds+T d did qqr dt r qfdrqq rIrr r dfl 
Rtf fdRsr Rfdq Rnddr ^ dt rr fddq Rrd r wqr q Rdn afR 
rtriRr r|fe d dt fdR Rid Rdf Rf r addR r dqq qdfq ddri 

fq wip d fddq d r rr rr t fd qfddd r dqR Rqfd d Rq 
dd d qd dddf d Rid r Rdd adc qqd qrroR dq qd ddr i r 
^ 5 dt pq qd i ^q ^ d qTfdf d dt wn fdqrpq qd 
dqr Rfd;i rtr dt rt: qdt Rfddf d Rddd dr Irt dt Rqftr d qrq 
fdRT t qqd qqd a^R dq qd’ ipi aiRT ^nd r qd I dr df rr 
r RRem dtarr d dt pr d fdfRT dfs fd^ad, Rmptf, gqqrqrqf qp qq rpj 
t fdrrd ai^qrR qrddd df qrsdf dt rr dqR qqqfd d qrq fdqRT t fqqg 
qfq Rqd qq qR rtt d fd qif d%qf d frqd d rrrt rt qd d rtr 
t i qd ddff r dq Rqfdq q q# fd ddr df dt qq tdri dt qqqfd d 
qp (df qqd Rrqqqqqq adq qpr qidq qqqiRjqqq qrf d ri r dqd) 
fqRR d df dd dq dr qt dqqr qRdjpR d rri Rfdqi rrrr Rfdrd d 
qqRRq dt. q;. qft. TJr af|q q^rq d qrq dt. qq. fdiqqRdt d^q d fd^ rt 
R dd dt qnqd qidt dd fq ^q "gfe ^ rp d dtR d rr r fd qif 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1367 


ANNEXURE II 1367 

RTT R1? RtRT Tt[R #TT Rf RRf TRT«f RT RTR Rft RTft TTt 1?TfR Tt RT RI^PlII 1TR fR RRT RTf 

•t41r?K Rift RTT fRT RR slfs'l Rft RTtf RFT R Rri RTR RR '^FT RfRRT iftHT 3 Frrj Rlftl 

fR RT Rf Rff fRRRf RRFJRTRf RTf RR RTRRTT Rf Rf RRf RRRt RTTtRR R 

RR %TRT RR RTT RfRRTTT t % RRTft TjfRRf' Rft RTRfR 3 Rftf RFT R fRRT 

RTTT| RR RTRTR RTRR RTTtRR iRTR fRRT RR ^TfRR Rft TPRfR ^ fRRR R f % 
RRRTt TTRRft RTf Rt RFT fRRf, 3RRf' Rf fRRR RRt'l RR RTR Rif RTR: RTfR 
Riff RTRlt RRRT ^ RT?t t'l RRRt RRtRR R ^ Rt fR^RT RR RR^RT 

RTf RfRRTTT 1? , fRRRTT RTTofRTRf Rif ffRRT RTRfR R RTR RR R? fRTfRt RRRf 

RRT1T RRRtR RR RRTTf f I 

RR 3R^R fRTRT RTRT ll sftR RRTf c|R5 R2R ll fRT RfR RTSfRTRf RTf ^RRT 

RTRfR fRRfRR: RR RTRfR 3 RfRRTTT fRRT Rl^RT Rf RR^ RRt RRRR Rt RTTRftl 

fRRTR RT RRRTR TTRfRTRT RTRfR RTf RTR 3f[T ^R if RTRRtl fRRR RRT RR fRRT 
RT RRTRT t fRT RtI RfRRf Rft RTRfR RTf TlftR if'l RR^ RRR RfRRTTT RR^ 
fRRT RTRI Rft fRRR #gR RRftRT RTR Rf TJRf RTfR RTf ^ypH4 RRFJRTRf' R 
RRTR fRTRT RTI TTRT ^RR RRTfRR RR fRRR ft RR RR]R fRTRT RTR 1? Rf Rtf 
RfRR Rt RRtR ffR t fRT RSfRTRf RTf R 1 ^ RffRR Rft RTRfR 3?R 

RR^ RRRfR RR RfRRTR ft fRR^ Rff 3R5ff cfft RRRT RR^ fRRTt RTR 

RTf fRRT^ RT ^ RR 3TfRRTR R #R RTffRI 

fR RRTfRR Rff RfR RilchK RR %RT RTR Rt RR^RR RT#T RR RfR 

RRTRTR Rf RTRT ^ I 

RRffRT RTSfRTRT RR fRRTt RT %TT fROR Rff %ff RR: RRRR fRRT Rft RTRfR 
RTtf Rpr -gf^T Rlfey, RR ^Irr Rt R^R Rf RR RTRR R^RT fhRT, HSIR^Ihi^RTR 

fRFT TRTRt RTTTRt RRT 3RR R^R ^ RtRfRRT RftRf R RT^R Rft fRRt fRTRRT t 

fRT fR fRRR T^' ^ Rf %®RT 3TRTRRRRT t I fRRTI? RT Rt 3TTRTRRJ°t T5R«f 
3RR RTRT fRRT RT?t t, fRR^ fRRTR RRRt RfRRR ffTRI^ RT RTtf RTTR Rff ftRT 
Rc^R RRTTt RfTRIT RRT Rf Hriy, Rt u l ^ RR ^Icl RRRTf RTR RTTR? RTSfRTRf Rft 

%RT RRT RTRfR RT RRR RRTRRTsf %RT RTRfR if' Tf RTR fRRTTRT RT^ Rf RR 

R^RT RfRR Rt ftRT I R^R fcRrfR Rft RTfRRTTTRT sfR 3TTRTRRjof rrtr; Rf fR^f 
RfR ttjr ft RT#rft 3?R RTRfRTRt' RTf RTRfR RT rrr RTTRfRRT RTR ft R^RTI 
3TTRTT t fR RfRRRf RT fRRTRRtTT RTtR RTTRtTRT ^ fRRR RTfjtl 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1368 


1368 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(ftp qfq fqq qq p? fqqR-12) 

qRc |K -gSTT 

4. c o(4dej Icf^JIcd'elHlfd 

qqp ftp qfP fqq 4' fqf ^TTTTSTf 4 qk 3^41 N qqq fqqT qT qqT 
t ^ ^ fqR qrqnf 4t fqkr qq 4 qqqpqfq fi 

qq 86 qftqR 4' qrq qqqfq R qftqfnq qqifqq 'Tsff qqqr I P qfs q 
3qqq qf4 qq qqT qqn4 qrq, 4 4kR qTTFf q qtRld Wt qpqf4 4' fkr 
q^k qr qrqr qq4 qT qfqqiq qf fq 4qq p cTR ft fqqffqr 4 1% qkqu 
qT R! qqT 4 qfRR 4' |T3TT qT fqqt 4t 3TgJFRT 4' t4)qd qff Ml 

(87) qfp^ ^qqqft qq qqH qrfiqlqRT qiqrTkt 4 qq 4' qpr qrpr:- 

qqp qp q aqqq qq qm qqk) qiq qk 4t qqqp qfpq qfqqrq qt 
qqqfq 4' fp qrkf 4 feqt 4)4 qfqqiq qf qpq q#f qkft qfr % qqqrfqqR 

4 fqqq qq qqqkqq 4 sffq qrqqq pfqr fqq4 fqq fp qq qfq qiqfkqr 

4 qrcqn p fkT qk qrpRT qfqqrq q4 qqqfq 4 ^ qqi qqqfq q4k qrftqlqRT 

aqqnfqqr' qr (44p p qPTp Tenants in common qq4 qRT qn4 t 4p 

fqqqr qnkrri qpfr fq qffq q aqqpq qft fqfq qq 4q4 qqqfq q fqqq 4' 

qrpq qfqqrq k qrqqq qrpk k qfq qHqrqr 4 qqr q sffq p 4 4 qqqq 

pfkr qqqi qpr pqfqpf qqTkt ^ ?q 4 qq4 qrq qqrq qrkt t i prTk :- 

(88) f4p qq k qf4q qkq qr (qiqq qikqkn) pious obligation qr 
fqqq qqfkr fkqr qrqi t (l) fq q4s q4 aqqq 4 qqqqr q4f qt qqrqq 
fqqiq qqr^ 4qT % qqqro 2 4' fqfqf4q feqr qqr t, fqqft -jp. 4br, -4rq qr 
fqq^:, qqr^ fqqr, fqqrqq, sffq qfqqnqq ^rq fqr4 q4 qqq qft qqjq) qr %4 
afrq 4)4 fqrqft qqq q4 qqpqft ^ qqq^q q fqqft qqqf% q4 atfqqqq 4' ^4 ^ 
Hny, fq qrqq qq fqr 4^ fqrqf qqr q4 pqq 4qr qqq "p , q)q qqqT qqlq 
qtr qif4qt q,4<q t, <=bipl qq4qis4 qrq4 ^ qfqqqq q4 wl-^d q^f q4qfti 

( 2 ) pr q4q ^ qqnr 4' 3^4 4r qf4^ qfq q4f qiq fqqT qqr t qf qq 
qiqq 4-' qqqro l 4 qfqqrfqiq q4f 41 qrq fqRffqrqf qq qqrq qqf qr#4ti 

(q) fqrqft 4t #rk qq p, 4q, sffq qq4r 44 % qjqq 4t, 4 fqqqg: 
qqpt qq4qTqt qrqq qrq4 qq qfqqqq qr 44 %qft 4q q4 qqpft 4 qqqR 
4 fqqrr qqr fqqqt qqqfq qq qqqn4q qr pqqqr (Alienation) 4[q 4qn q4f 
qfqqqq qr qqqqnfq qrf4qr qqfR 4 fqqq 4 qqfq qq4 qqqq 4k qqft qW 
qqr qqkr 4 quqT qkqi 4qn fq qq q4q qrq q 44 q4 qqqq 4 fqq qrqn 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1369 


ANNEXURE II 1369 

89-TlfRR RffRTT Rp TTRTRT Rft RRF Rp Rffft Rft RTR fRRRRT PdPkkft R MP/dP 
Rff ftRT-RFT FR RRF Rp 3TFFR ft R%Ft TTgRR RffRTT ^ pHRIHd? RR Rnrf FIR 

RffRTT Rp RRtRRTf Rff RTRf %RT RRT ft ft R7T 3TRTRT f |R Rffe f dP'dRsld 
Rpf| ft RTR TTfTR RffRTT Rff fRTTTt ft RRTR Rft RRR RTR "fTR ft Rft HrJ-ArI-O 
RT FTF^ Rff 'gTcfr aflT fft RTtf ffiRRTft ff TTRTR RT fRFff ft °RfRRRf RT ft 

aRR? ftTR RRTRTRt T? TTTff RRTTT aflT fRt ■rIhI RR? 3TTFR Rft Rlfft 'frit RT? RTF 
RTR R ftf Rft TJTR f Rft Riff I ScdlP'R 

TTRR Rft 3TTRftT ft RR RTR3ff Rp TTWR f RRT i Weft t FRRp FKT RFJRR RffRTT 

RRT RR, Rft fe SRTfR RTRT 3 Reft RT # 1TR RTffRT RRT |, 3TR ft WQ^TT I ff^ 

RTF fRRT RT Rft RTR-fRRTR fRWt fMf RTTRfR TFRTfTTR 3 flRT TFT I RRRft 4 fRR 
TJRR RR 3TRTTT TJSTRT ft RTRT T?3TTI TJFt RT? RTRRTT TTRgR 3TTRRf T?3TT fe FTFR 
TTRR RTRHT fRTtff RR/ 3qPk rrrr ^ effe f^rf^ RRT Rp RRTI RRT fldMI RTTtrffR 
3TFRR I I Pd-ftP RR-RR RT fRRft RRfR 3 ftf 3TRRTp RT ffTT ftF RTR %RT 
aftT RfRTaft Rp Pin l-d 3TRfR RRTR RTTp RT ft 7 R u d) RR RWT d?ls R? PcR>«S 
fRRTI RR? RTTHT ■gffFFTRTtft TFRR Rp RTR R'. RT^ftRRR fRR fff RTRHT RRt TTRTRR 
RRfpRRTRt RR RF RHRRR TTRTRT aflT R^RT RR 3TRRR 3TTRRfRfRTT RTTR RT7RT ReffeT 
ftRT fl RfR WJR RtRTTRT RTTtRftR 3TFRR RR f5\R4, TT«TRT RRT RRTaft RT RRRT 
fRRRTTT Rt RRT R fR? ^ RR^ ' 1 J U T RTTt RRt RRp eft RRt RRt ft TTTTRft RRR R?T efft? 
2 3T^RT Rf RTRR 3 4. RTTtT^tR 3TRRR ^ RRTTR? Rp fRR^ aftT TT^RR RffRR RRT 
RT TTR«tR $ R|R ^ RTRTI T^RT ft R'. RT^ftRRR aftT 3TRRT Rp R'. 'g^TR P4dl(ldld 
RPfR R ft RTTRI TT^RR RffRR RRT RR RTR: RTTR ft ftRT RTT TRT fl RefRTR fRRRt 

rP argrnr rItrr rr Rftf ft ttrtr tttrttr rrtP rtr RTfRT rr^ ft tttt^ rrrt ft 

TTRTRT f I RTTRtR WTMRf aftT fRRtRftftTRT RT fffR TTRRR RffRR Rp TTRTRT Rp fTT 
afRRRT RR TRtg?R R?TR ^ RR f f I grid 3pR RR fRRR RTRt eftft ^ TRR-TTRR 
3TTRR-fRRTTTfR f fR Scldl RR RRT f RRT 3RR ft 3pR? RffftRfRRT RRFR ft 
Rf f ffRf TfgRR RffRR RRT TRRRR RRTRTR ft ^Rff f afr UPdR-T fteft RTT Tft 
f fRRg f TRR fRRR R ffTRR Rft RTT^ 3RRRRRTRT Rft TTRfRTTI f ft fR RTR RT 
RTTTRf Rft gfe f ^ RRRRT RTFRT WRT fRRRt RTR Rft rpnf RRlf RtTTffR? Rf 
af(T ft. RTTfftR 3TRRR ff RRf RRffFT ff tl RT3RT RRTgRTR TRffRt ^ fftR RRRt 
RT RtffTRT f fRRR ftRTT fRRR Rfl 

(1) Rj.TR id 9/1 TT f fFFRT f:- 

TT^ TTF RRt^Rf, TJRR^ Rf RTRRRTI 
Tjgr^ Iwsff Rf: RRR1R RRf TJR^ %RT II 

3TRfeT fR RRTTT Rf TTTR Tf 3TRRT 3TFFT 3TTFT Tf RT? adfl fW RT fffT f I RT 
3TFFT-3TFFT TRR ft Rf Rft ^Ps fteft f ^RpedR 3TFFT-3TFR TRR?T Rvtf RrTRT Rf-TFRR f I 
FTTRft °dKsHI R ■gRTjR? RRR R fRTW f fR? “'gRRf 3TffRRrTT ¥RTT: TTF Rff 'RT 

srfeTRRRT RTTTfRRTRT: TJSTT^ RTRTR RSFlRTSTtf RTfeT TJSFT-'gsrR RFIR^trUg^TRSTfr^Rf 
Iwsff TRRTR tf RTR%RT I " 3TRteT ^TT RRRT Rif arfRRRR TF RR TTTR Tf 3TRRT 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1370 


1370 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

tl ^Tn=nTr t fRRRT (t^Ri) toto 3trrt-3trft f, TOnft totr-totr tor rt 

wwi TO 3RJTOR 3WT-3WT tit tl TOf TORT tl sTRldM, fRRFT ftTO 3T«Tf^ 
dTORI RRt 3TRRT-3TRRT ftRT TORT Rt t TOJfRT t I 

RTOftt % tl TO TOTt # °dlte4l TOt TOT RR %TO t ft “TTOJ 

ffcrtt d r^i <=i i ^ -w m R J jtl d i P h w w iPr dd/e) i i — f^rm - : tt ftronfsT 

TORttRfsiRt W ■hM u II Tdi d ddd qn ” 

( HjT^Pd , tNTft«TRTTO, 2R «TFT, d>dd>dl TTTTORT ij. 273) 

3rt^ t fRRT t tftf tit |TT ftlTO TOT RlRT t tfc RR TO TTgroj ^THT 

t RTTTO TRJTO RffRR 4 fRRFT (pTOT tl TORT) 3 HPh«=I| 4 RT 3TOIdTOd> tl RfTRR t 
■H'vt-yl t fRRTR tit RT R tit t tlf TOf RT 3TTOf Rgf t, TO TO TOT pt tl 

(2) RTOHfd FjfR t TO ft(R t TOR RRT t :— 

i^chmeh-i ccHdi , lMq^cii4'iild 4 iH. i tt^ ^ratfg^rariHf , TOtTOTOR^ 1 jt 1 jtu 

(dTOMPd TRft 26/5 R. 96 TOt TRTORT) 

3TRfR RT^ TOTTft Rft ITOM Tf sjk pT/ TOFT RT R1TOR TOR cfr fRRRR, <o)i|^|[< 
RRT tl tl ■Hdidl t ftRJ t fRRRR tl 3TRFT-3TRFT Tt eft t TOT ycdR> RT t 
tit t TOftTR fRRRR ttT TORT tt tTOT 3FTO tl 

(3) 7 ftcT l T *nf TJR 284 R tt ft TOT RR tt tit 4 TJR UTTT RRTR ftRT RRT 
t 4) IdHprlfeld t:- 

tTOFt ^ 

3T«t^ TTRRR RffRTT tf 3TRSTT TOTO f4^T^T tl TOR RT W\ tftl tl 

S^l ydiK ^ ddd 3F5T tl 3F®fl t tit t ftrg frit tl el) J l) ^ ddd 

STFrant fF35 ^ ftR ' t FlfRr tl tl TFpT tl M tl W#T snt 

ft^ ^rt 3fR FWft 3TftFTt ^TT 3FT RH tt tl 3 T%r4 

RTRfTt tl FRcTF f tl tt t W Wt ttT ftltlTT t I t, W t 3TTR^W 
t ft TORT TO tfT tj 4 TTO^t^ ftTOft TORT TO ftTO TOT R til 

STTOftR 3/30 t tTO tl sntT tl 

J-I^dt TOTOTTOftf^t <+>uiirt|c):| 3Ft 3FTOftlf4rT cCdH'dldlFMclIsn' II 

33t?T t ^TOT 3tr ITO tflr TOT tl RTOTT 3tT 33TO TOT tl TOTfTO TOTO tj 
■gR 3TTTO t tn TO Ttl tRT RFT RTOTO t Tfft TTOcfl tl 

TOTTOTfTO t 2 ^ TT^TO tTOR RRT t R^T-fRR^ f R^R ftRIT TO TTTOTT t, 
ft^ t TO fRTO f ftRTOT TOT 3RTOTOT Rtl TRTfRTTI tttTTO RTftft TO fRTOTT, 
TTOTORTOlft ^pt tl tt T?t R tTOT tl TTTOfl t tTR tit TO RTR: 3pRR tl 
TRttf cTRT 3TTOT t Rft TOT atr TOp^t TOfflR TORT t RTOTO TJRTO TO TOfTO 
t til TOftRT ^ft 4 TORT fttro tl RRIr tl 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1371 


ANNEXURE II 1371 

(%^ d>)-S fRRT RT fRRR-13) 

cfft 3H|c|V'Mcbdl 

xf. Spf^R |c(il|c(|T>|^fd 

RR 3 RRJRR 4Rc|K RRT Rp RRRR 3 RTfSpR ^ xjrg; RRRRT 

RTRTT RTI RFRR1R 3#W Rlt RPRi% Rl fRRR Tf fRRfR R7t 3RRRRRTRr 

RR R#f RR^ft I ^ ^fRRTRRf Rf RFRftng: 3lfRRTR fRRRt fro Tf Rp RRf RR?p 

"3T^MT# 3T^RTX5TO -*T WTT RFpj: ^^PITR I ^RT fRRT TRRT RR 
TTRT ^fN: RjdHI RRRSR: ||” (RFR^ 5/625) 

RRff r rj’rrtr Rft rtrrt rrt yqndi rr diPRRi Rf yPddKd 
RR?t fir RRRfcns: 3 #^r rr Ptorrrt fRRrr rrt f i Rfe, 4 r, Irrh sufR 
ydi ^di41 Rt •yyndi rP Py.giR Rpf wIrr/ rr£ t fRR^ R^RfR^pRRRT rr rr8*r 

d^l pi d 1 1 RRFPR Rf RRT rrt rr RTt -§' -j% RRff^ TJUf- <*, 4-3rRRTR 

RT 3RfRR duloMd'IrSTT Rp fegRR RR yPdyKH RRRt fir R?RT«fRRRRT 4' W %®T 

t % :- 

“R fRRRt RTf RlRT 5FI RT 4 3 RRRRfRR FfRT RRffe RRRpf 3PRf 

RP5Rf d^Rbd)' =P Wf RRR°f Rf R)tj[ ^ ^jpT Pd^imRT sffR RRTCTRT 

Rft ^ P# ^Prld, ^ Rt 3TXRRRRT R #ft l” fRRPRR 3?R 

RTRRTR Rf 3RR RT fdWK R Rfll R RRR R#f fRRRJ fR fw 

R RRRT RT RRT fRgJR feFT^ RRRR ^ f^ RT RRTRt RT RRgRT RTT^ft ^ft 
fir RcfT 3RRRT RRRRjnf 3ftR yPokiRdd R1R 3PRf 3^qR RT 3RRR -qi 
Pd ^4, | 3^riy ^ 'qff Rf^Icf RcfrcT 'gtcTT t I % “fwr^RI dft 

3^^T gRTRIR 3TpRR7 3q^xb t I R qRdK W, ^ 

3Tfdd,K|R Rpf -rtitt^ d, R8J I d ^ fe f^R R RRt 

qRduT R/ RIRIRT 3RFRTt ^ f RRf% y^qPd R RFRftRg- srfRRTR RPR t 
RR fe RRM Tp RRf RRTRRT ^ 3T^RR RPTR RRfpRT t, RRRT RTtMrT 
3fR RTRRt ^ f cHil’pch qRdK R RRR ^ ^ # RPRR Rpff 

3TfRRTR RTR RRf R)RT l” 

(%Rf RTT RPipRt -g. 154) 

fqRT, iRRRR # RiRT Rft ^fdRT ddWlPddl ^ ^JR, qldlR Rpf ^RR RR% RPt 
RTR R) ^olT^d RTR 88 R RTRt Rf t -gfdRgRR RRT ^TRRRTR RRtR Rtdt tl 

RRT RRT R^RTRRR f^ Rpfe fRRT RPt 3RRRRRTRT R 34dlPldl RR RRR t, % 
fRRRRT t fe fRRTt Rt RR3R M RRTRfl^fR RR fR fRRR R RR'JpR #TT 3RRRRRTR 
f| 3TR 3 tRtRkR -RlRftR R RTRlR R^Rf R PlPdPldNT RT fRRTR (RRRR) RR RRTR 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1372 


1372 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Ft TFTFT t I 'TFff: yil’WK FcHIFtTi : ’ FTT FTfFFiTftFiT affT TF1FF FFT gFTFT 
ft FTfFFTT FfFF F % Tff IF ft Ft 3TfFFT FTFcF ftcft f, ffg TPTTF FTt 
41uW|)iil ^ ^ | ^ qrRf if ■qt FTTFT FiTTF Fft FTffFTf 

Ftcft f, 3fR 'FIFIdFt FT FTTFT fFTFF fffF FT FTTFF FF fk FTfFF FTT FFT 
3TFTFF ftFT f 3TF: gFT f4tIWM ff^ FTtF FTT ftFT FcfFT gfe k FFFftF t I 
FFff FFFFF % W(H Ft FFcF FTt “Fitf ffiFFT ft Fit FTFJ Ft TF-fll TFF 
ftFT t FF Tl4kR FFF ftFT f, 3TFFT FFFFFFT FT 3TTTJF TffF, 3TFt FTTf FTT 
FFFTF FJF, FFT FT FTFT-fFFT FT TTFTF FTFT, 'FTF fk 3FFTF FT FTF f44R>l4t 
FF TFF Ft ggf TgFFTFFT Fff fl” gF FTff F Rldlcl gg %®T “FFg RfF-RfF 
FTFT, 1FT3TT, 3TFTF-3TFPT °FF5K FF fFTfF «><iFI 3Ff?T gFiT ft I fFFT IFF) 
FTTFT FF gTT FFFTTT sftT 3TfFFTF ftTTF ftFT FTfcTF f l" 

(TTrFTstFFTTF 8 F TJF) 

gf gTPt TFfF FcftF Fft FtFT f fFT flFg^ FTfF 3TFIF 3TFF «HF$KlR FF 
fFFFFT FTT gT Fift F TTFPTFT ftFT FF: FF FFFFTt f I FtFFT ffgaff FT %g 
ft Fft, FFt FTTcftFf FT %g TJFT TTfTTPTFF TFFFTT TtffFT (FTtF) FFT^ FTF FTT 
FTF F gk FTtf gTjf FcftF Fft ftcft FT FTPt 3TfFFT TTFF cktFT I FTlft g4 
ffgff Ft TTF3F FTT gg FiT/t FFT TTPTTfFFT griff Fit gT Fift FT %g ffg^ 
FTtF Fit Ft FFFTfFFT k ^FFT Fft fFTFT FT FFTFT I ktFTTFT FkkftF 3TFFF kk 
TfFF Ft FTTFT gR<r1F Fftft Tf f fk fFFFit FFtFfcT F 3TF fFFtF FftFcfF 
ft FFT f, frn FTFf FF Ff Fitf FFTF Fft fFFTFT, Fff gTT gfe tt ft ff^ 
FTfF FF fFTN FTT Tf f Ft Fitf 3TTFFf Fft FTF F ftft 3FFFT FFFF gTTf 
Fftf TFF^T Ft Fft fFTPf TTTF-TTTF FTtf FTFF Fit FF FTFFFFTFT FcftF ft I 

FF FTFFT fFT FcfFTF TtfFFTF FF ^ FFTFt Fit fFFT Fit FFf F TFtFTF 
FTTf FF STfFFFT Fft FF gfFFTFTF FcftF ftcft I Fff FFT fFFTF FFlf FFcFggf 
FTlf Fit FTTf FF 3TfFFFT TTlcft f Ft If ^ FTtF fFFT f 4 FFFTFt fFFT Fit 
FFFt F Ff FTF FTTf FT arfFFFT f ^F FfFF fFTFT FT TTFTFT f fFFtFF: FF 
fFT TffFFTF FFT FgT TTFffFFFT TFFF TFcFF TTTSTT Flfl FT gF-fl f I FT, fFFt 
FTF FFFF ’FTFTTFF sftT gfFFgFF f fFT ff^ FTtF fFFT fff fFFT FT TFFfF ft 
FiT 3TfFFTR fFFT ffg TRTFf FTt ft ft 3FFt Fit Fft FFTFft 3Tffg3ff FF gTPf 
Fftf TTK5PF Fft I ftTTT fFT ft gF #FFTFTT f FTTTFtF ftT ^TTFFrftFT gfe ft 
FTgF ffg FTtF fFFT Fit ffF-ffF "gT^T FTTT3ft FT FFTRT FTFlf gg FFTFT f 
gFT fFFTF, 3FFFfcftF fFFTF TTF«fF, ftFFt Fit FFTT Fit F^FF gcFTff fFFFFT FTTFi 
FT FTF WTFtF f I fFFTF Fit 3TTg, -gfFFf FT FTF FTF F arfFFTR FFT 3FF fFFFt 
F TTFftFFf Fit 3TTFFFFTFT t I FT-Fg^ FT %tt .FFcIF 3TTg 24 Ff fk 16 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1373 


ANNEXURE II 1373 

#ft nflT ifll t 22 afk 15 3m H # ^ft nfl^ ifl dcdild 24 sfft 16 
fin mi R litf fiRi iifidR it i 3 if% Rnrfi simmrf R mmr-fi^k lit 

Sl^lfl <^TT 3imiT It It 31+1 Wf lit sftl 3lflH mt! llTlf m3 11T 8 , 
10 mf lit %ft 3mfl Pdf^d iff ^TTTT fmp£ itlT d^l + dl, MMIdMd 11T 
(life) ^|R if mir it mm Pl^iR lit 3131 % 3 it m 3 I fim flll^T 
lit 31 mi m %tt it fim mi sww I i ^ ii ^ %3 -511 lit 

3 irg 25 mf sftr lit lit 333 21 mi lit 31131 #ft mfni 1 -jfmf lit min 

1 mftmiti 11 fw lit mrfi R -jit it hit lit fmj RnR m finn 

mfni 1 if 1% lit mrfi sftr tm n mtm ^ ^ fmrf ifr fmrfi 3 rfim 

Rddi mfi3 1 'jfmf lit 33m mrfi li mill n srfim #1 11R3, 

iR li 3 rfifm 3mf lit in fmni n rfrf n 1#', mrfrf mrfm if 

Riy, 5Ri ii<d |[3 ifrf frf^ ills fin n mmnin wti fim m3 if 11 
mm sftr ^iRd lit ^ if fiiK 1 mfm ifn it itm 1 fn^ mm 
lit mfin 3wn iftmti t, im nm 3irfm 3nw ^mf ii fin Rmi 
mfirrfi lit 31 mi m njn m i mm nffi iif itm 1 sum t fmimrftm 
1113m fimi itm 11 fimt n n-itm ^ fim niff 1 


• •• 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1374 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1375 


INDEX 


A 

Aborginal Tribes : 840. 

Adi Dravidas : 886. 

Adoption : 106-27, 605, 634-35, 863, 866. 
— capacity to : 106-9, 114-15. 

— conditions for: 116-17. 

— duttaka : 272. 

— dwaimushayan : 272. 

— effects of: 118-21. 

— godha : 260, 272, 605. 

— kruthrim : 260, 272, 337. 

— record of : 124-27. 

— requisites of : 106-9. 

— void : 122-24. 

Adwaita (Philosophy) : 394, 747. 

Agarkar : 1037. 

Ahimsa : 1159. 

Aizas Rasul, Begum : 33, 34. 

Alagesan, O. V. : 750-60. 911-17. 

Albert, the Prince : 680. 

Alimony : 94-95. 

Aliyasanthana female marriage : 74. 

Aliyasanthana Law : 74, 264, 265, 266, 
268, 269, 631, 908, 940, 1187, 1189, 
1190, 1191. 

— divorse in : 98-100. 

— nullity of: 98-100. 

— special provision for joint family : 
146. 

Amba Veda : 547. 

Ambedkar, The Hon’ble Dr. B. R. : 
3, 4-17, 37-42, 236, 238-39, 241, 
252, 255-83, 285-88, 299, 300, 
301, 304, 308-10, 312, 314, 316, 
317, 320, 324, 328, 339-40, 342, 
347, 352, 353, 354, 355, 364-66, 
368, 372, 382, 418, 438, 446, 448, 


449-51, 454, 475, 476, 487, 488, 492, 
498, 501, 504, 507, 529, 531, 540, 

541, 546, 560, 565, 566, 633, 641, 

643, 655, 674, 698, 700, 704, 705, 

716, 717, 718, 720, 730, 750, 752, 

754, 756, 758, 766-73, 774, 775, 780, 
781, 784, 785, 791, 794, 796-98, 805, 
808, 810, 822-24, 830, 838, 844-45, 
848, 850, 855, 859-60, 862, 864, 874, 
877, 889- 90, 893, 896-98, 903, 907, 
909-12, 919, 921, 922, 923, 926, 932, 
953, 955, 961, 963, 964, 966, 970, 
971, 972, 975-76, 983, 984, 988, 990, 
997, 999, 1016, 1017, 1037, 1040-41, 
1050-58, 1061-62, 1065, 1067, 1070, 
1075, 1078-79, 1081, 1083-85, 1089, 
1091-94, 1097, 1098, 1101-02, 1109, 
1111, 1121, 1125-27, 1130, 1136, 
1143, 1145, 1149, 1154, 1156-76, 
1178, 1180, 1182, 1186, 1187, 1188, 
1190-92, 1194- 97, 1199, 1201, 1203, 
1207, 1208, 1210-12, 1217, 1220, 
1222, 1223- 25, 1227-32, 1235-38, 
1241, 1243-45, 1249-49, 1254, 1255, 
1257, 1259, 1260, 1264, 1265, 1268, 
1270, 1273, 1278, 1280, 1282, 1289, 
1292, 1296, 1297, 1299, 1302, 
1304-10. 

— abolition of caste : 267-68. 

— adoption : 260-62, 269-70. 

— coparcenary law : 271-75. 

— customary law of adoption : 271- 
272. 

— daughter’s share : 264. 

— divorce : 10, 11, 259-60, 1166. 

— dowry : 8. 

— on Hindu Code — 

— to Non Hindus : 882-85. 

— to be voluntary : 882-84. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1376 


1376 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


— joint family property : 265. 

— law of maintenance: 8, 9, 264. 
— monogamy: 267-68. 

— motion moved to refer Hindu 
Code to Select Committee : 4. 
— personal ideal: 1161. 

— position of women : 1060-61 
— refutes charges : 1158. 

— religious freedom : 1167. 

— reply to critics : 879-90. 

— reply to debates : 766-73. 

— salient features explained : 5-11. 
— secular State :. 

— meaning of : 883. 

— succession : 5, 6, 263-64. 

— supremacy of Parliament : 1168. 
— survivership : 1159. 

— uniform Civil Code : 880-82. 

— valid marriage : 9, 10, 267-68. 

— women’s right to Property : 7, 8, 
15-16, 277-78, 279-81, 1166. 

Amolak Chand : 1165. 

Ananci marriage : 873. 

Andazi form of marriage : 340. 

Animists : 887. 

Anthony Frank : 900. 

Annulment of marriage — 

— certificate of : 66-67. 

— court jurisdiction : 90-94. 

— custody of children : 94. 

— dissolution of : 82-87. 

— divorce : 56, 84. 

— guardianship in : 72-73. 

— interpretation : 56-57, 80, 86-88, 
90. 

— objection to : 62-65. 

— penalty for bigamous : 76-77. 

— records of: 60-71. 

— registrar : 61. 

— solemnisation of : 66-67. 

— void : 81, 91. 

— voidable : 82-83. 

Anuloma : 229, 234, 237. 

Apstambha : 1060. 

Artha : 388. 

Arthashastra of Kautilya : 269, 667. 


Arya: 1060, 1064, 1160. 

Arya Samaj : 31-32, 235, 994. 

Arya Samajist(s) : 236. 

Ashwamedha Yagna : 657. 

Astik Darshan : 1112. 

Atmabandhas : 279. 

Atharvaveda : 547. 

Ayyangar M. Ananthasayanam : 4, 42, 
528, 684, 746, 781, 782, 900, 928, 
936, 938. 

Ayyar Alladi Krishnaswami : 4, 42, 
629-43, 687, 692, 698, 719, 722. 

Azad Maulana Abdul Kalam : 303, 
304, 963. 

B 

Babar : 613. 

Backward Classes : 886. 

Badagas (Tribe Community) : 748. 

Bagade K. J. : 943. 

Baishnava Philosophy : 425. 

Bakshi Tek Chand Dr. : 4, 42, 236- 37, 
240, 318, 331, 355, 488, 495, 632, 
707-27, 745, 756, 760, 818, 898, 970, 
992, 1096, 1174, 1175, 1176. Baldev 
Singh Sardar : 1284. 

Banerjee Purnima : 376, 386, 746. 

Banerjee S. C. Dr. : 722. 

Barman Upendranath : 238, 971. 

Bhagwan Das Dr. : 1055, 1060. 

Bharati L. Krishnaswamy : 4, 26, 42, 
237, 239, 262, 284, 289, 296, 319, 

329, 341, 342, 345, 349, 350, 351, 

364, 375, 388, 389, 390, 392, 395, 

406, 442, 461, 466, 475, 478, 479, 

482, 483, 484, 511, 514, 533, 535-37, 
553, 555, 563, 574, 577, 578, 580, 

589, 646, 648, 653, 654, 667, 672, 

674, 687, 746, 759, 817, 837, 895, 

904, 909, 986, 988, 990, 998, 1013, 

1014, 1021, 1080, 1093, 1095, 1104, 
1106, 1108, 1116, 1166, 1207, 1223, 
1225, 1301, 1302. 

Bhargava Mukut Bihari Lai : 247, 248, 
267, 292, 294, 505, 547-84, 585, 603, 
626, 784, 795, 796, 882, 904, 1003, 
1051, 1054, 1080, 1095, 1275. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1377 


INDEX 


Bhargava Pandit Thakur Das : 4, 9, 
229-34, 236, 240-42, 244-48, 253, 
258, 267, 284-86, 287, 292, 312-56, 
361-62, 370, 374, 380, 382, 384, 385, 
445, 447, 449, 495, 611, 712, 768, 
795-96, 798, 818, 819, 879, 880, 882, 
885, 887, 888, 889, 892, 907, 916, 955, 
969, 970, 985, 988, 1001, 1076, 1077, 
1078, 1090, 1115, 1167, 1175, 1180, 
1182, 1193, 1194, 1197, 1198, 1199, 
1200, 1201-3, 1205-8, 1211, 1213, 
1214, 1225, 1226-29, 1232, 1237, 
1238, 1248-50, 1252-54, 1255-62, 
1265, 1268, 1277, 1282, 1286, 1288, 
1292, 1294, 1295, 1310, 1311. 

Bhatt G. D. : 625, 693-707, 725, 753, 
975, 976, 1034, 1038, 1039, 1043, 
1049-68, 1088, 1089, 1144, 1164, 
1169, 1170, 1196, 1205, 1216, 1217, 
1261, 1262, 1279, 1282, 1286, 1301, 
1307. 

Bhattacharya K. K. : 800. 

Bhimsmriti : 372. 

Birkenhead Lord : 633. 

Bose Subhash Chandra : 371, 386, 387. 

Brahmin(s) : 229, 299-300. 

Brahmo Samaj : 645, 650, 673, 880, 939, 
994, 1037, 1063. 

Brahmoism : 14. 

BrajeshwarPrasad : 593, 800, 1038, 
1153-54, 1273. 

Buddha: 747, 887, 995, 1154, 1139. 

Buddhism: 389, 405, 601, 806, 939, 
994-95. 

Buddhist(s) : 704, 840-41, 843-44, 850, 
853, 863, 868, 871, 880, 887, 888, 
1064, 1069, 1070. 

Burke Edmond : 26, 394. 

c 

Cacharis (caste) : 36. 

Campbell Sir George : 1101. 

Chadar marriage : 340. 

Chaliha Kuldhar : 562. 

Chandala : 1112. 

Chadar Andazi : 1097. 


1377 

Chandradari marriage : 229. 

Charvak : 1111. 

Chatterjee N. C. : 545. 

Chattopadhyaya Mihir Lai : 4, 42, 448, 
1007. 

Chaturvarnya : 880, 1159, 1160. 

Chaudhari Smt. Kamala : 655-64. 

Chettiyar T. A. Ramalingam : 282, 330, 
457, 1085, 1090, 1091. 

Child marriage : 368. 

Chinese Potentate : 613. 

Chottu Ram : 1283. 

Choudhari Rohini Kumar : 35-37, 39, 
40, 337, 588, 589, 591-94, 596, 646, 
691, 708, 730, 732, 757, 765, 767, 
768, 769, 775, 781, 782, 785, 791, 
793, 849-52, 852, 853, 853-55, 856, 
883, 890, 891-99, 957, 958, 961, 962, 
970, 981, 984, 1010, 1011, 1014, 1030, 
1034, 1038, 1041, 1044, 1049, 1051, 
1079, 1080, 1088, 1092, 1106, 1121, 
1127, 1128, 1162, 1171, 1187, 1195. 

Christ Jesus : 370. 

Christians : 843-44, 855, 856, 863, 870, 
882, 885. 

Civil Justice Committee : 552. 

Civil marriage — 

— conditions of : 59. 

— formalities of : 60-61. 

— procedure for : 60-67. 

— validity of : 58. 

Communism : 330, 363. 

Congress Indian National : 14, 357, 361. 

Conjugal rights — 

— restitution of : 78-79. 

Cowasji Jahangir Sir : 695. 

Customs : 13, 14, 316, 366. 

Czar of Russia : 613. 

D 

D’Souza Rev. : 1099. 

Dadabhai Sir Mankekji : 950. 

Damocle’s sword : 1088. 

Das Dr. Monomohan : 304, 313, 327, 
329, 389, 410, 498, 524, 544, 584, 
541, 973. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1378 


1378 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Das Bishwanath : 256, 257, 271, 285, 
294, 369, 370, 383, 402, 429, 457-79, 
488, 497, 500, 516, 648, 746, 757, 
792, 845, 900, 901, 961, 962, 917-28, 
1035, 1040, 1062, 1065, 1096, 1106, 
1111, 1122, 1127, 1154, 1155, 1156. 

Dasiputra : 484. 

Dasyu : 1060. 

Dayabhag : 5-7, 20, 279, 345, 402, 403, 
429-30, 437-38, 565, 574, 579, 590, 
591, 592, 602, 643, 652, 653, 670, 
703, 713, 720, 1012, 1272. 

Dayanand Saraswati, Swami : 387. 

Deshmukh Punjabrao S. Dr. : 4, 42, 453, 
459, 485, 594, 652, 589, 716, 766, 
813, 819-23, 828, 849, 1010, 1011-24, 
1026, 1056, 1081, 1112, 1205, 1206, 
1207, 1214, 1220, 1231, 1239, 1241, 
1246, 1249. 

Dharma : 268, 283, 371-72, 378-79, 
380, 382, 387, 398, 408, 601, 651, 
659, 709, 713. 

Dharma Nirnaya Mandal : 437. 

Dharma Shastras : 31, 297, 308, 1134, 
1264, 1266. 

Dharmik marriage : 58, 60, 68, 70, 80, 
870, 871, 873, 874, 992, 998, 1099. 

Dhulekar R. V. : 3. 

Directive Principles : 606. 

Divorce : 299, 300, 310, 311, 317, 341, 
367, 605-6. 

Dixit, Smt. : 1265, 1267, 1285. 

Dowry : 8, 152-53. 

Durgabai G. Smt. : 4, 43, 300, 304, 313, 
322, 329, 352, 398-403, 407, 410, 419, 
421, 427, 428, 429, 451, 454, 473-74, 
480, 481, 483, 501, 502, 552, 555, 

567, 591, 623, 753, 757, 758, 760, 

785, 786, 792, 793, 796, 812, 822, 

841, 878, 957, 958, 1017, 1018, 1080, 
1082, 1121, 1122, 1125, 1130, 1131, 
1142, 1240, 1309. 

Dwaita Philosophy : 394. 

E 

English book of prayers : 703. 


F 

Fundamental Rights : 359, 369, 770, 
771. 


G 

Gadgil N. V. : 422, 426, 433-40, 820, 
946, 956, 963, 988, 990, 995, 996, 
1028-40, 1049, 1050, 1051, 1063, 
1141, 1196, 1209. 

Gandharva, form of marriage : 427, 876. 

Gandhi M. K. : 233, 311, 316, 357, 371, 
386, 387, 421, 426, 625, 626, 656, 
658, 659, 663, 671, 747, 1056, 1057, 
1058, 1154. 

Ganga Lehri : 614. 

Gargi : 377. 

Gargya : 1037. 

Gautam Mohan Lai : 242-43, 302, 318, 
321, 331, 900, 1165. 

Gita : 373, 597, 682, 900, 1039. 

Gitanjali : 1059. 

Gladstone P. M. of England : 907. 

Godha son : 484. 

Goenka L. : 532. 

Gopalswamy : 1076. 

Gotra : 481, 582, 626, 630, 635, 721. 

Gotraj : 279, 297-305. 

Gour H. S. Dr. : 231, 237, 698, 702, 
862, 950, 1061, 1156. 

Govind Das Seth : 270, 295, 360, 381, 
505, 506, 946, 947, 949. 

Greeks : 612. 

Gupta Deshbandhu : 235-36, 269, 283, 
284, 895, 1061, 1083, 1084, 1092, 
1205. 

Guha A. C. : 506, 507. 

Gupta V. J. : 1146, 1216, 1219-20. 

Gupte B. M. : 618-20. 

Guru Granth Saheb : 743, 870, 873, 
1097. 

Gurumukh Singh Musafir : 1075. 

H 

Hadis: 1168. 

Halisbur’s Laws of England : 671. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1379 


INDEX 


1379 


Hanumanthaiya K. : 233-34, 238, 241. 

Harijan journal : 1025, 1033. 

Henry Maine Sir : 645, 646. 

Hill Tribes : 840. 

Himmatsinghka Prabhudayal : 257, 262, 
774, 911, 1000, 1001. 

Hindu Agarwals (caste) : 229. 

Hindu Code — 

— aim of : 5. 

— application of : 50, 51, 52. 

— definition of : 50-53. 

— overriding effect of : 54-55. 

— referred to Select Committee : 4, 
12 . 

Hindu Law Committee, 1944 : 306, 464. 

Hitler : 385, 1020. 

Hukum Singh Sardar : 625, 740- 46, 
799, 800, 817, 824, 842, 870-79, 887, 
888, 889, 1071, 1075, 1080, 1171, 
1172, 1173, 1175, 1226, 1242-44, 
1246, 1248- 49, 1285. 

Hussain Imam : 875, 946, 951, 956, 
1154. 

I 

Inayat Ullah Khwaja : 828, 986, 1127, 
1128, 1146-49, 1228. 

Inheritance — 

— of Mulslims : 281. 

— of Par sis : 281-82. 

Ismail Khan Mohammad : 507. 

J 

Jagjiwan Ram : 300, 309, 351, 571. 

Jaimini : 721-22, 1111. 

Jain Aggarwal : 229. 

Jain Ajit Praaad : 648, 729. 

Jains: 841, 842, 853, 856, 863, 871, 
880, 882, 885, 888. 

Jaju Sitaram S. : 304, 369, 624-28, 1145. 

Jajware Ramraj : 919. 

Jangade : 1262, 1277-80, 1287. 

Jats : 843. 


Jaikar M. R. Dr. : 1011, 1156. 

Jayashree Smt : 1024-27. 

Jews : 843-44, 856, 862, 863. 

Jhaniram : 776. 

Jhunjhunwala B. P. : 292, 387, 798, 
815, 825, 829, 976, 1176, 1194, 1195, 
1209, 1210, 1215, 1234, 1235, 1249, 
1290, 1300. 

Jinnah M. A. : 1035, 1052, 1063, 1164. 

Joint Family System : 604. 

Joint family and coparcenary — 

— provisions regarding : 136-39. 

Judicial separation : 78-79. 

K 

Kaiser of Germany : 680. 

Kalidas : 426, 755. 

Kaliyug : 1298. 

Kama : 387. 

Kamath H. V. : 267, 281-83, 294, 334, 
369-73, 374-87, 392, 402, 411, 414, 
415-17, 423, 426, 427, 436, 506, 533, 
535-37, 560, 590, 596, 704, 714, 769, 
958, 964, 970, 988, 991, 1002, 1006, 
1007, 1013, 1016. 

Kameshwar Singh of Darbhanga : 
664-66. 

Kanva, the sage : 422. 

Kapur Jaspat Rai : 241, 243-44, 252-53, 
296-97, 512, 774, 800, 801, 815, 817, 
819-21, 829, 830, 831, 850-53, 856, 
857, 882, 889, 891, 903, 904, 922, 
931, 951, 954, 964, 969, 974, 975, 
982, 997, 1042, 1043, 1063, 1081, 
1088, 1119, 1128, 1147, 1164-67, 
1169, 1176, 1178, 1180, 1181, 1183, 
1203, 1212, 1214, 1241. 

Karewa marriage : 340, 874, 1097, 1099, 
1251, 1254, 1255-57. 

Karma v Philosophy of : 659. 

Karwari marriage : 229. 

Kasturba : 387, 626. 

Kautilya : 667. 

Kayasthas : 614. 

Keats : 1059. 

Keshav Rao V. C. : 4, 42, 938. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1380 


1380 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Keskar Dr. B. V. : 32, 33. 

Khandekar H. J. : 649, 728, 730. 
Khojas : 1164. 

Khurshid Lai : 4, 42, 497, 600, 501, 532, 
833, 837, 840, 841. 

King Lear : 939. 

Koran : 389, 1267. 

Kripalani Acharya J. B. : 680-87, 690- 
93. 

Kripalani Smt. Sucheta : 305-12, 360, 
691. 

Krishnammachari T. T. : 444, 585. 
Kshatriya(s) : 230, 300. 

Kumarila Bhatt : 1111. 

Kunzru Hirdaynath : 288, 290, 998, 
1040, 1041, 1044, 1046, 1050, 1054, 
1060, 1063, 1154. 

L 

Lenin : 545. 

Ludendroff Gen. : 680. 

Laxmanan Mr. : 1012, 1118, 1276. 

M 

Macaulay : 533. 

Mahabharat : 230, 378, 427, 669, 950, 

1004, 1025. 

Mahavir : 888 
Maintenance for wife : 9. 

— provisions regarding : 188-97. 

— term explained : 188, 189. 

Maitra Pandit Laxmi Kanta : 390, 395, 
396, 404-33, 439, 440, 445, 447, 454- 
57, 458, 459, 461, 465, 482-83, 495, 
503-4, 531, 563, 564, 586, 587-92, 
596, 598, 611, 613, 618, 627, 633, 
640, 647, 664, 678, 698, 959, 989, 
990. 999, 1031, 1032, 1039, 1041, 
1043, 1047, 1048, 1049, 1050, 1089, 
1090, 1103, 1120, 1122, 1153, 1160, 
1162, 1164, 1169, 1172, 1250. 
Majumdar S. C. : 691. 

Malaviya Pandit Govind : 455, 596, 688, 
729, 757, 783, 842, 980, 981-84, 1004, 

1005, 1007, 1141, 1154, 1155. 


Malaviya Pandit Madanmohan : 698, 
1024, 1050, 1051, 1085, 1086, 1103- 
26, 1128, 1130-45, 1160, 1185, 1286, 
1302-4, 1309. 

Malbari Saheb : 694. 

Mallayya Srinivasa : 4, 42. 

Mandal J. N. : 470, 534, 466, 467, 536, 
1070, 1173. 

Mandan Mishra : 377. 

Mann B. S. Sardar : 385, 959, 969, 1042, 
1068-73, 1074-80, 1086, 1092, 1102, 
1120, 1122, 1125, 1147, 1148, 1157, 
1169, 1171-73, 1175, 1244, 1245, 
1246, 1284, 1289, 1290, 1295, 1297. 
Manu: 280, 301, 373, 381, 435, 566, 
590, 606, 616, 703, 708, 722, 755, 
852, 995, 1006, 1037, 1050, 1051, 
1079, 1109, 1161, 1266, 1267, 1274, 
1280, 1283, 1298. 

Manusmriti : 546, 703, 811. 

Marathas : 614. 

Marumakkattyam Law : 266, 269, 590, 
602, 620, 621, 622, 679, 754, 908, 
928, 940, 1187, 1189, 1190, 1191. 
Marumakkattayam marriage : 74. 

— annulment of : 98. 

— divorce of : 100. 

— special provision for joint family : 
146. 

— succession to property and 
guardianship : 166-70, 176. 

Mascarene Mrs. Annie : 234, 376, 423, 
460. 

Mashruwala K. : 1025. 

Matrubandhus : 209, 310, 317, 359. 
Mavalankar G. V. : 535. 

Max Muller : 933, 1058. 

Maxwell Reginald : 459, 534. 

May’s Parliamentary practice : 329, 332. 
Mayukh : 670, 703, 713, 715, 723. 
Mayukh Law : 635. 

Mehta Smt. Hansa : 27-30, 41, 336, 
386, 423, 522. 

Menon A. Karunakaran : 423, 441, 620, 
621, 622, 623, 624, 654, 1018, 1245. 
Mimamsa: 1114-15, 1116, 1134, 1135, 
1136-37, 1154. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1381 


INDEX 


1381 


Minority — 

— definition of : 128-29. 

— provisions regarding : 128-35. 
Mishra Loknath : 584, 598. 

Mishra S. P. : 799. 

Mitakashara : 5, 6, 7, 20, 265, 272, 274- 
76, 279, 360, 364, 402, 403, 429-30, 
437, 563, 565, 579, 591, 602, 670, 
703, 652, 653, 711, 712, 713, 715, 
722-23, 1012, 1272. 

Mitakashara Co-parcenary : 140-45. 
Mittal, Justice : 38. 

Mitter Dwarkanath Dr. : 282, 538, 539, 
540, 541, 542, 559, 666, 721, 697, 699. 
Mohani Maulana Hasrat : 375, 405, 406, 
407, 507, 689, 727. 

Mohemad All : 854. 

Monogamy : 28, 29, 310, 317, 359, 419, 
605, 606. 

Montague Chelmford Reforms : 237. 
Mookerji B. K. : 441. 

Mookerjee Sir Ashutosh : 544. 
Mookharjee Shyama Prasad Dr. : 358, 
545, 986-1002, 1003, 1004, 1007, 
1008, 1010, 1014, 1015, 1019, 1024, 

1026, 1028, 1029, 1030, 1031, 1033, 

1039, 1045, 1048, 1147, 1151, 1154, 

1157, 1558, 1159, 1167. 

Moppu (custom) : 269. 

Mountbatten Lord : 371. 

Muhammad Ismail Khan : 507. 
Munshi K. M. : 234-35, 237, 239, 504. 
Musafir G. S. : 949, 1144, 1145. 
Munavalli B. N. : 426, 497, 563, 1105, 
1108, 1115, 1118, 1120. 

Muslim Law : 443, 520, 531, 851, 855. 

N 

Nabundri(s) — 

— special provision for : 146. 

— succession to property : 178. 
Nambudri Law : 1189. 

Nagappa S. : 569, 581, 649. 

Nagoki Sardar : 1075. 


Naidu Kum. Padmaja : 1149. 

Naik M. : 981. 

Nand Lai Master : 259. 

Napoleon : 525. 

Narada Smriti : 29, 270, 344, 651, 
1026, 1137. 

Nastik Darshanas : 1112. 

Natukottai Chettiars (caste) : 636-37. 

Nazruddin Ahmed : 3, 22, 23-27, 32, 
37, 38, 241, 256, 257, 284, 285, 287, 
288, 290, 292, 293, 294, 295, 312, 

320, 323, 340, 411, 435, 440, 454, 

458, 502, 508, 547, 743, 764, 773, 

777, 780, 781, 784, 792, 793, 794, 

795, 799, 800, 801, 804, 817, 829, 

837-49, 855, 856, 858, 859, 861, 862, 
885, 886, 893, 915, 937, 958, 959, 

960, 968, 970, 971, 972, 973, 974, 

975, 987, 1041, 1050, 1056, 1077, 
1081, 1145, 1165, 1179, 1183, 1184, 
1187, 1188, 1189, 1190, 1191, 1192, 
1193, 1203, 1208, 1212, 1222, 1223, 
1224, 1233, 1249, 1268, 1272, 1300, 
1303, 1309. 

Nehru, the Hon’ble Shri Jawaharlal : 
687-88, 697, 761-64, 776-77, 782, 
963-64, 1018, 1083, 1084, 1086, 
1162, 1264. 

Nibhandhas : 410, 548, 708. 

Nibhandhkas : 582. 

Nilkantha, author of Mayukha : 723. 

Niyogi K. C. : 709. 

Nyaya, Philosophy : 425, 583. 

o 

Oraon, Mr. : 1276-77. 

Osborne : 534. 

P 

Paitkinasi Smriti : 1134, 1135, 1137. 

Pande C. D. : 1162, 1237, 1273-77, 1306, 
1307, 1308. 

Pant D. D. : 1046. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1382 


1382 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Parashara Smriti : 270, 435, 651, 1026, 
1137, 1280. 

Parsis : 840-41, 843-44, 853, 856, 859- 
60, 862, 863, 882, 885. 

Pataskar H. V. : 598, 609, 698, 751, 
769, 771, 772, 773, 782. 

Patel Vallabhabhai : 238, 239. 

Patel Vitthalbhai : 236. 

Patit : 886. 

Patrimony : 18, 359. 

Pattabhi Sitaramayya : 12-22, 32, 34, 
667-80, 697, 769, 771, 772, 773, 
782, 830. 

Paul Dr. R. B. : 545. 

Pillai A. Thanu : 481, 708, 754, 758, 679. 

Pillay V. I. Muniswamy : 746, 747-50, 
753. 

Pillay Sivan : 776, 1290. 

Pindas : 871, 874, 875. 

Pitrubandhu : 279. 

Plato : 426. 

Polygamy : 419-29, 310. 

Portia of Brutus : 372. 

Prasad Brajeshwar : 442, 408, 593. 

Prathana Samaj : 880. 

Pratiloma : 229, 237. 

Pratiloma Marriage : 1033. 

Pravara : 481, 630. 

Privy Council : 5, 36, 40, 268, 272, 281. 

Prophet Mohamad : 600, 1054, 1060. 

Punjab Customary Law : 853, 855, 872. 

R 

Radhakrishnan S. 379. 

Rai Krishnanand : 1162. 

Raj Bahadur : 300, 372, 373, 793, 827- 
28, 839, 842, 858, 861, 866, 869, 890, 
894, 900, 911, 930, 942-46. 

Raja Ram Mohan Roy : 356, 431, 627, 
708, 709, 747, 947, 1031, 1037, 1057, 
1154. 

Rajendra Prasad Dr. : 322, 431, 434, 
439, 664. 


Rajgopalachari C. : 985-86, 988, 989, 
1190-91, 1226. 

Rajput : 614. 

Ram Sahay : 30-32, 609-11. 

Ramanuja : 747. 

Ramayana : 315, 346, 427. 

Ranade M. G. : 1037. 

Ranbir Singh: 235, 239, 396, 595, 
1282-90. 

Ranga Prof. N. G. : 23, 885, 915, 916, 
951. 

Rao M. Thirumal : 6, 243, 247, 426, 
481, 585, 597, 625, 648, 649, 936, 
938. 1018. 

Rao, S. V. Krishnamurthy : 363, 383, 
415, 672, 739. 

Rattigam Mr. : 850, 853. 

Rau Committee on Hindu Law : 37, 
262, 266, 280, 356, 372, 460, 461, 

462, 463, 465, 470, 553, 554, 562, 

581, 693, 701, 725, 904, 1173. 

Rau Sir B. N. : 27, 398, 589, 670, 696, 
697, 714, 716, 726, 760, 934. 

Rau Bill : 558-64. 

Ray Smt. Renuka : 4, 42, 281, 293-94, 
301, 318, 324, 344, 345, 356-63, 370, 
405, 407, 408, 410, 427, 440-42, 447, 
448, 592, 640, 678, 697, 707, 786, 

838, 841, 857, 858, 860, 861, 863, 

901, 963, 970, 983, 986, 991, 1054, 
1082, 1090, 1109, 1120, 1121, 1122. 

Regenarated Classes : 270. 

Reichstagg : 675. 

Remarriage : 89. 

Rigveda : 558-64. 

Robert Low : 673. 

Romans : 612. 

Roman Catholics : 991. 

Roy Ashoka : 670. 

Roy M. N. : 1057. 

Russell Bertrand : 622. 

s 

Sacramental Marriages : 59, 61, 356, 
368, 630-33. 

— registration of : 69. 

Sadhana Samaj : 1037. 

Sagotra : 1037. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1383 


INDEX 


Sagotra Marriages : 310, 359, 416, 

635, 1005, 1197, 1285, 1286, 1287, 
1288-89. 

Sahu Laxminarayanan : 490, 585, 586, 
597, 685, 724, 740. 

Saksena Mohanlal : 3. 

Saksena Shiban Lai : 773. 
Samanodakas : 279. 

Samveda : 547. 

Sanskaras : 850, 924. 

Santhanam K. : 245, 246, 449, 451, 453, 
558, 586-97, 598, 601, 605, 606, 609, 

636, 642, 720, 727, 729, 751, 797, 
818, 1192, 1193, 1194, 1206, 1207, 
1220, 1222, 1233, 1235, 1238. 

Sapinda : 9, 29, 56-57, 59, 279, 353, 
551, 557, 558, 559, 632, 635, 743, 
1037, 1134, 1197, 1223, 1285. 
Sapravara Marriage : 1005. 

Sapru Tej Bahadur, Sir : 529, 697, 943. 
Saptapadi : 644. 

Sarkar N. N. Sir : 453. 

Sarwate V. S. : 254, 255, 296, 297, 700, 
796, 797, 805, 808, 809, 816, 817, 
850, 1087, 1235, 1269-73. 

Sastri T. R. Venkatarama : 283. 

Sataa : 1261. 

Sati: 306, 316, 709, 1261. 
Satishchandra : 834. 

Satyagraha : 371. 

Satyartha Prakash : 

805. Savarkar V. D. : 805. 

Sayaji Rao : 1062. 

Secularism : 883. 

Sen keshub chunder : 650, 1031, 1155. 
Sen P. K Dr. : 4, 42, 643-47, 649-55, 693. 
Separate Electorate for women : 357. 
Seshagiri Ayyar T. V. : 676. 

Setalwad Chimanlal : 697. 

Shah K. T. : 728, 731-40, 1139. 
Shakespeare : 372, 614. 
Shankaracharya : 377, 389, 639, 747, 
1111 . 

Sharda Bill : 297. 

Sharda, Mr. : 297. 

Shariat: 34, 1060, 1077-78, 1147, 1163, 
1164, 1168. 


1383 


Sharma Pandit Balkrishna : 4, 42, 331, 
649, 700, 718. 

Sharma Pandit Krishna Chandra : 860, 
861, 869, 1043. 

Shastras: 15, 371, 721, 722, 724. 

Shastric Law : 651, 652. 

Shaw Sir Lallubhai : 234. 

Shwetketu : 949. 

Shia : 701. 

Shiva Rao B. : 4, 42. 

Shiv Charan Lai : 815, 1127, 1214. 

Shraddhas : 578, 579. 

Shrikrishna : 373. 

Shrotriya : 437. Shudra(s) : 229, 269-70, 
299, 300, 437, 614, 701, 772, 851-52, 
1004, 1160. 1174, 1175, 1278, 1279, 
1280. 

Shukla A. C. : 1037, 1070, 1071, 1155, 
1168, 1172, 1275, 1281, 1282, 1283, 
1288. 

Sidhawa R. K. : 284, 293, 299, 332, 374, 
376, 442, 568, 590, 648, 678, 684, 
707, 779, 1019, 1114, 1130. 

Sidhvirrappa S. : 393-97, 406, 408, 409, 
428, 438, 444, 845. 

Sikhs: 853, 863, 871, 872, 880, 883, 
885, 887, 888. 

— four castes as S. C. : 879. 

Singh A. P. : 1195, 1225, 1229-30, 1250, 
1290. 

Singh Babu Gopinath : 790. 

Singh Babu Ramnarayan : 4, 42, 253-54, 
289-90, 321, 383, 388-93, 417, 468, 
511, 523, 531, 533, 539, 542, 555, 560, 
610, 646, 667, 668, 890, 912, 1145, 
1156, 1157, 1216, 1217, 1219, 1226, 
1248, 1262-69, 1278, 1296, 1299. 

Singh T. N. : 942, 1129, 1261, 1280, 
1281, 1282, 1306, 1307, 1308. 

Sinha B.K.P.: 901, 966, 1003-11, 1140, 
1210, 1215. 

Sinha Satyanarayan : 728, 729, 764, 
777. 

Sirkar Rishindranath : 459. 

Smriti( s) : 24, 41, 287, 297, 301, 
305, 308, 397, 398, 400, 410, 
425, 473, 546, 548, 550, 557, 559, 

583, 612, 615, 614, 616, 626, 629, 

651, 652, 665, 701, 703, 704, 708, 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1384 


1384 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


1012, 1050, 1134, 1135-36, 1154, 
1168, 1258, 1264, 1266, 1306. 

Sochet Singh: 1075-1076. 

Socialism : 303. 

Sonawane : 793, 902. 

Sondhi B. L. : 386, 432, 511, 667, 682, 
686, 711, 724, 841, 883, 957, 1017, 
1125, 1174, 1309. 

Sriniwas Ayyangar : 400. 

Sruti(s) : 24, 398, 546, 615, 616, 651-52, 
1135-36, 1258, 1415. 

Stare decisis a principle : 888. 

Stridhan : 7, 8, 18, 31, 269, 277-79, 350, 
481, 578, 641, 642, 661, 676, 702, 
703, 710, 715, 722, 749, 750, 758. 

Subramaniam, E. : 912. 

Subbarayan P. Dr. : 759. 

Subrul Miss : 354. 

Succession : 154-187. 

— intestate. 

— to males : 156-71. 

— to females : 172-78. 

— intestate and other provisions : 
172-75, 178-87. 

— provisions regarding : 155-66. 

— property right to women : 301-3, 
308-09, 316-17, 343, 349, 350, 
356, 360, 361. 

Sun-yat-sen : 916. 

Sunni : 701. 

Swaminadhan Smt. Ammu : 443, 458. 

Swarup Krishna Chandra : 302, 331, 
407, 441, 611-18, 695. 

Syamnandan Sahaya : 824, 828, 840, 
877, 890, 901-11, 915, 921, 926, 948, 
962, 963, 964, 969, 1004, 1010, 1011, 
1050, 1061, 1062, 1063, 1068, 1087, 
1092, 1127, 1157, 1161, 1164, 1170, 
1171, 1195, 1197, 1210, 1211, 1212, 
1239, 1262, 1264, 1277, 1290, 1294, 
1298, 1301, 1302, 1303, 1306, 1307, 
1308, 1309. 

T 

Tagore Ravindranath : 940, 1031, 1051, 
1059. 


Tajamul Hussain : 289, 295, 302, 308, 

310, 319, 322, 323, 326, 330, 331, 

333, 342, 367, 462, 463, 466, 470, 

484, 490, 493, 498, 518, 520, 525, 

536, 537, 539, 570, 1154. 

Talaq : 300, 385. 

Tantras : 425. 

Thiraipanam : 748. 

Thiruvalluwar saint : 747. 

Tilak B. G. : 1037. 

Toda Caste : 748. 

Tripathi Kishor Mohan : 4, 42. 

Tulsidas saint : 372. 

Tyagi Mahavir : 237-38, 239, 268, 285, 
345, 367, 380, 383, 386, 390, 448, 

450, 451, 456, 457, 503, 512, 513, 

520, 522, 526, 647, 648, 670, 679, 

688, 694, 702, 709, 726, 730, 731, 

765, 772, 774, 778, 780, 786, 797, 

798, 809, 831, 832, 834, 837, 838, 

841, 843, 860, 861, 865, 866, 869, 

873, 874, 877, 890, 894, 895, 944, 

951, 1075-76, 1079, 1100. 

Tyagraj saint : 751. 

u 

Ubhaya Bharati : 377. 

Uniform Civil Code : 606-09, 880-82. 

Untouchability : 380. 

Upadhyaya R. C. : 1035, 1066, 1078. 

Upnishadas : 372, 1058. 

V 

Vaishyas : 300. 

Valmiki : 657. 

Varna System : 1160. 

Varnas : 268, 1209, 1210, 1215. 

Varnashram Dharma : 1209. 

Vedas: 297, 473, 546, 547, 550, 669, 
721, 805, 806, 880, 939, 947, 1058, 
1159, 1263, 1264, 1265, 1266, 1267. 

Vedic Brahmins : 887. 

Vedic Literature : 24. 

Velayudhan R. : 908. 

Venkat Raman : 898, 912. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1385 


INDEX 


Victoria The Queen : 680, 907. 

Vidyasagar Ishwar Chandra : 297, 419, 
694, 710, 947, 1057. 

Vidyavachaspati Shri : 798, 810- 15, 
816, 850. 

Vigyaneshwar Annotator of Yagnav- 
alkya : 703, 722. 

Viramatadhira N. S. : 723. 

Vivekanand : 379. 

Vyadhikas : 268. 

Vyas Radhelal : 1089, 1119, 1205, 1228, 
1288. 

w 

Wakfs : 519. 

Widow remarriage : 317, 346-47. 

Women’s Property — 

— devolution of : 150-51. 

— dowry for : 152-53. 

— nature of: 150-51. 


1385 

Women — 

— right of maintenance : 860. 

— succession of : 867. 


Y 

Yagnas : 880. 

Yagnavalkya : 280, 301, 371, 381, 435, 
566, 590, 703, 708, 722, 723, 755, 
1006, 1037, 1050, 1058, 1274, 1280. 
Yamin Khan : 1060. 

Yajurveda : 547, 1006. 


z 

Zoraster : 600. 
Zorastrian : 1065 


ACTS 


Age of Consent Bill 1890 : 710. 

Anand Marriage Validating Act, 1909 : 
743. 

Arya Marriage Validation Act : 231, 232. 

Baroda Divorce Act, 1937 : 1026. 

Caste Disabilities Removal Act, 1950 : 
886 . 

Child Marriage Restraint Act : 932, 
1040, 1052, 1063, 1168. 

Christian Marriage Act : 1065. 

Civil Marriage Act, 1872 : 235, 236, 420. 

Civil Marriage Act, 1921 : 698, 850-51, 
941, 1007, 1066. 

Deshmukh Bill of 1937 : 711, 721. 

Hindu Marriage (Disabilities Removal) 
Act of 1946 : 630, 1005. 

Hindu Marriage Validation Act of 1949 : 
1005, 1060. 

Hindu Married Women’s Right to 
Property Act, 1937 : 453, 458, 459, 
613. 

Hindu Widow Remarriage Act, 
1856 : 709. 


Hindu Widow Remarriage Act, 1871 : 
552. 

Hindu Widow Remarriage Act, 1872 : 
552, 645, 932, 941. 

Indian Succession Act, 1925 : 28, 231, 
583, 881, 882, 1024. 

Kutchi Memon Act : 929, 1061. 

Married Women’s (Separate Residence 
and Maintenance) Act : 1006 

Married Women’s property Act, 1883 
(England) : 1261. Muslim Law : 851, 
854, 858. 

Parsi Marriage and Divorce Act, 1865 : 
495. 

Punjab Laws Act: 892, 1101. 

Removal of Class Dissabilities Act, 
1850 : 231, 709, 711. 

Removal of Sati Act, 1829 : 708, 709. 

Sarada Act: 14, 29, 353, 526, 527, 
619, 711, 854, 855, 947, 1063, 1067, 
1089, 1155. 

Shariat Act : 931. 

Special Marriage Act, 1872 : 23, 471, 
472, 646, 645, 881, 883, 1024. 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1386 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1387 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\voI-14-II\voll4-II-05.indd 


MK SJ+YS 27-10-2013>YS>27-12-2013 


1388 


BLANK 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


PUBLISHED VOLUMES 

Vol. 1 

• Castes in India 

• Annihilation of Caste, Maharashtra as a Linguistic Province, Need for 
Checks and Balances 

• Thoughts on Linguistic States 

• Ranade, Gandhi and Jinnah, Evidence before the Southborough Committee, 
Federation versus Freedom 

• Communal Deadlock and a Way to solve It 

• States and Minorities 

• Small Holdings in India, Mr. Russell and the Reconstruction of Society 


Vol. 2 

• In the Bombay Legislature 

• With the Simon Commission 

• At the Round Table Conferences 

Vol. 3 

• Philosophy of Hinduism 

• India and Pre-Requisites of Communism 

• Revolution and Counter-Revolution in Ancient India 

• Buddha or Karl Marx 

• Schemes of Books 


Vol. 4 

• Riddles in Hinduism 


Vol. 5 

• Untouchables or the Children of India’s Ghetto and other Essays on 
Untouchables and Untouchability Social — Political — Religious 


Vol. 6 

• Administration and Finance of The East India Company, The Evolution 
of Provincial Finance in British India, The Problem of the Rupee [History 
of Indian Currency and Banking, Vol. 1] Miscellaneous Essays. 


Vol. 7 

Who were the Shudras ? 

• How they came to be the Fourth Varna in the Indo-Aryan Society ? 

The Untouchables 

• Who were They and Why They Became Untouchables ? 


Vol. 8 

• Reprint of Pakistan or the Partition of India 


Vol. 9 

• What Congress and Gandhi have done to the Untouchables ? Mr. Gandhi 
and the Emancipation of the Untouchables 


Vol. 10 

• Dr. Ambedkar as Member of the Governor-General’s Executive Council 
(1942-46) 


Vol. 11 

• The Buddha and his Dhamma 

Vol. 11-SUPPLEMENT 

• Pali and other Sources of the Buddha & his Dhamma with an Index 


Vol. 12 

• Ancient Indian Commerce, The Untouchables and the Pax Britannica, 
Lectures on the English Constitution, The Notes on Acts and Laws; 
Waiting for a Visa, Other Miscellaneous Essays 


Vol. 13 

Dr. AMBEDKAR 

• The Principal Architect of the Constitution of India 


Vol. 14 

Dr. Ambedkar and the Hindu Code Bill 
Part One 

• General Discussion on the Draft (17th November 1947 to 14th December 
1950) 

Part Two 

• Clause by Clause Discussion (5th February 1951 to 25th September 1951) 

Vol. 15 

• Dr. Ambedkar as free India’s first Law Minister and Member of Opposition 
in Indian Parliament (1947 to 1956) 

Vol. 16 

• Dr. B. R. Ambedkars 

(I) The Pali Grammar 

(II) The Pali Dictionary 

(A) Pali into English 

(B) Pali into English, Marathi, Hindi and Gujarathi 

(III) Bouddha Pooja Path 

Vol. 17 

Dr. B. R. Ambedkar and his Egalitarian Revolution 
Part One 

• Struggle for Human Rights 

Part Two 

• Socio-Political, Religious Activities 

Part Three 

• Speeches 


