
Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar 

(14th April 1891 - 6th December 1956) 


blank 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR 

WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

VOL. 3 


First Edition 

Compiled 

by 

VASANT MOON 


Second Edition 

by 

Prof. Hari Narake 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar : Writings and Speeches 

Vol. 3 


First Edition by Education Department, Govt, of Maharashtra : 14 April, 1987 
Re-printed by Dr. Ambedkar Foundation : January, 2014 


ISBN (Set) : 978-93-5109-064-9 


Courtesy : Monogram used on the Cover page is taken from 
Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar’s Letterhead. 


Secretary 

Education Department 
Government of Maharashtra 


Price : One Set of 1 to 17 Volumes (20 Books) : Rs. 3000/- 


Publisher : 

Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

15, Janpath, New Delhi - 110 001 

Phone : 011-23357625, 23320571, 23320589 

Fax : 011-23320582 

Website : www.ambedkarfoundation.nic.in 


The Education Department Government of Maharashtra, Bombay-400032 
for Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication Committee 


Printer 

M/s. Tan Prints India Pvt. Ltd., N. H. 10, Village-Rohad, Distt. Jhajjar, Haryana 


m 

Adk 



Minister for Social Justice and Empowerment 
& Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Kumari Selja 


MESSAGE 


Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar, the Chief Architect of Indian Constitution was 
a scholar par excellence, a philosopher, a visionary, an emancipator and a true 
nationalist. He led a number of social movements to secure human rights to the 
oppressed and depressed sections of the society. He stands as a symbol of struggle 
for social justice. 

The Government of Maharashtra has done a highly commendable work of 
publication of volumes of unpublished works of Dr. Ambedkar, which have brought 
out his ideology and philosophy before the Nation and the world. 

In pursuance of the recommendations of the Centenary Celebrations Committee 
of Dr. Ambedkar, constituted under the chairmanship of the then Prime Minister 
of India, the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation (DAF) was set up for implementation of 
different schemes, projects and activities for furthering the ideology and message 
of Dr. Ambedkar among the masses in India as well as abroad. 

The DAF took up the work of translation and publication of the Collected Works 
of Babasaheb Dr. B.R. Ambedkar published by the Government of Maharashtra 
in English and Marathi into Hindi and other regional languages. I am extremely 
thankful to the Government of Maharashtra’s consent for bringing out the works 
of Dr. Ambedkar in English also by the Dr. Ambedkar Foundation. 

Dr. Ambedkar’s writings are as relevant today as were at the time when these 
were penned. He firmly believed that our political democracy must stand on the 
base of social democracy which means a way of life which recognizes liberty, 
equality and fraternity as the principles of life. He emphasized on measuring the 
progress of a community by the degree of progress which women have achieved. 
According to him if we want to maintain democracy not merely in form, but also 
in fact, we must hold fast to constitutional methods of achieving our social and 
economic objectives. He advocated that in our political, social and economic life, 
we must have the principle of one man, one vote, one value. 

There is a great deal that we can learn from Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and 
philosophy which would be beneficial to our Nation building endeavor. I am glad 
that the DAF is taking steps to spread Dr. Ambedkar’s ideology and philosophy 
to an even wider readership. 

I would be grateful for any suggestions on publication of works of Babasaheb 
Dr. Ambedkar. , 



(Kumari Selja) 


Collected Works of Babasaheb Dr. Ambedkar (CWBA) 

Editorial Board 

Kumari Selja 

Minister for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

and 

Chairperson, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 

Shri Manikrao Hodlya Gavit 

Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

Shri P. Balram Naik 

Minister of State for Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

Shri Sudhir Bhargav 

Secretary 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 


Shri Sanjeev Kumar 

Joint Secretary 

Ministry of Social Justice & Empowerment, Govt, of India 

and 

Member Secretary, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Viney Kumar Paul 

Director 

Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


Shri Kumar Anupam 

Manager (Co-ordination) - CWBA 


Shri Jagdish Prasad ‘Bharti’ 

Manager (Marketing) - CWBA 


Shri Sudhir Hilsayan 

Editor, Dr. Ambedkar Foundation 


FOREWORD 


Dr. Ambedkar, the Chief Architect of Indian Constitution, is well- 
known not only as a constitutionalist and a parliamentarian but also 
as a scholar and active reformer all over the world. As a champion of 
the down-trodden he waged relentless struggle against the oppressive 
features of Hindu society. Throughout his life, he strove for establishment 
of a new social order based on the principles of liberty, equality, justice 
and universal brotherhood. 

The Indian society owes a tremendous debt to his radical and 
humanitarian approach for solution of the problems of the Backward 
Classes. 

The Government of Maharashtra is committed to the welfare of the 
backward classes for whose uplift Dr. Ambedkar dedicated his whole life. 
Thoughts and teachings of great men like Dr. Ambedkar will always serve 
as a beacon light for the new generation. Our Government, therefore, 
feels proud and happy to bring out these three consecutive volumes of 
his unpublished writings as part of our total project of publication of 
the writings of Dr. Ambedkar. 



(S. B. CHAVAN) 
Chief Minister of Maharashtra 


blank 


PREFACE 


I consider it a great honour to have been asked to write a preface 
to these volumes which consist of hitherto unpublished writings of 
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar. 

Dr. Ambedkar occupies a position of high eminence among the learned 
scholars of Indian society and philosophy. His erudition and learning as 
reflected through his writings may serve as a beacon light for rational 
approach towards our social and religious problems. 

The Government of Maharashtra has undertaken the work of bringing 
out complete writings of Dr. Ambedkar in a series of volumes. The 
reconstituted Committee appointed for this work, has now come up with 
three consecutive volumes of the unpublished writings, which were very 
eagerly awaited by the students of India’s social and political evolution. 

The present volumes, which deal with philosophical as well as social 
problems of Indian society, may prove interesting to the scholars as well 
as to the new and young generation which is eager to find solutions to 
the national problems on a rational basis. 

The Editorial Board is to be congratulated for the zeal, dedication 
and care which they brought to bear on the expeditious publication of 
these volumes. 



(Prof. RAM MEGHE) 

Minister for Education, 
Maharashtra State 


blank 


Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar, Mahatma Phule, Rajarshi Shahu 
Source Material Publication Committee 


1 . 

Hon’ble Shri Dilip Walse Patil, 

Minister of Higher & Technical Education. 

President 

2. 

Hon’ble Shri Suresh Shetty, 

Minister of State for Higher & Technical Education. 

Member 

3. 

Shri Ramdas Athawale 

Member 

4. 

Shri Prakash Ambedkar 

Member 

5. 

Prof. Jogendra Kawade 

Member 

6. 

Shri Nitin Raut 

Member 

7. 

Prof. Janardan Chandurkar 

Member 

8. 

Shri Tukaram Birkad 

Member 

9. 

Prof N. D. Patil 

Member 

10. 

Shri Laxman Mane 

Member 

11. 

Dr. Janardan Waghmare 

Member 

12. 

Shri T. M. Kamble 

Member 

13. 

Dr. Baba Adhav 

Member 

14. 

Dr. A. H. Salunkhe 

Member 

15. 

Dr. Jaysing Pawar 

Member 

16. 

Prof. Ramesh Jadhav _ 

Member 

17. 

Prof. Vilas Sangve 

Member 

18. 

Shri N. G. Kamble 

Member 

19. 

Dr. M. L. Kasare 

Member 

20. 

Shri P. J. Gosavi, Deputy Director, 
Government Printing and Publications. 

Member 

21. 

Dr. Joyas Shankaran, Additional Chief Secretary 
Higher and Technical Education. 

Member 

22. 

Dr. K. M. Kulkarni, Director of Higher Education 

Convenor 

23. 

Prof. Hari Narake 

Member- 



Secretary 


blank 


INTRODUCTION 


The members of Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication 
Committee are pleased to present this volume of Dr. Babasaheb 
Ambedkar’s unpublished writings to readers on behalf of the Government 
of Maharashtra. This volume is significant and unique in several respects. 
Firstly, the contents of this volume were hitherto unknown. These are 
the unpublished writings of Dr. Ambedkar which were in the custody of 
the Administrator General and the custodian of Dr. Ambedkar’s property. 
The students of Dr. Ambedkar’s writings and his devoted followers were 
anxious to read these writings. Some of the followers of Dr. Ambedkar 
had even gone to the court to secure permission for the printing of these 
writings although the manuscripts were not in their possession. Thus, 
these writings had assumed such significance that it was even feared 
that they had been destroyed or lost. 

There is a second reason why this volume is significant. Dr. Ambedkar 
is known for his versatile genius, but his interpretation of the philosophy 
of and his historical analysis of the Hindu religion as expressed in these 
pages may throw new light on his thought. 

The third important point is that Dr. Ambedkar’s analysis of Hindu 
Philosophy is intended not as an intellectual exercise but as a definite 
approach to the strengthening of the Hindu society on the basis of the 
human values of equality, liberty and fraternity. The analysis ultimately 
points towards uplifting the down-trodden and absorbing the masses in 
the national mainstream. 

It would not be out of place to note down a few words about the 
transfer of these papers to the Committee for publication. During his 
life time, Dr. Ambedkar published many books, but also planned many 
others. He had also expressed his intention to write his autobiography, 
the life of Mahatma Phule and the History of the Indian Army, but left 
no record of any research on these subjects. 

After his death, in 1956, all the papers including his unpublished 
writings were taken into custody by the custodian of the High Court of 
Delhi. Later, these papers were transferred to the Administrator General 
of the Government of Maharashtra. Since then, the boxes containing the 
unpublished manuscripts of Dr. Ambedkar and several other papers were 
in the custody of the Administrator General. 

It was learned that Shri J. B. Bansod, an Advocate from Nagpur, had 
filed a suit against the Government in the High Court Bench at Nagpur, 


Xll 


INTRODUCTION 


which was later transferred to the High Court of Judicature at Bombay. 
The petitioner had made a simple request seeking permission from 
the court to either allow him to publish the unpublished writings of 
Dr. Ambedkar or to direct the Government to publish the same as they 
had assumed national significance. This litigation was pending before 
the Bombay High Court for several years. 

After the formation of this Committee and after the appointment of 
Shri V. W. Moon as Officer on Special Duty in 1978, it was felt necessary 
to secure the unpublished writings of Dr. Ambedkar and to publish them 
as material of historical importance. Shri Moon personally contacted 
the legal heris of Dr. Ambedkar and the Administrator General. Shri 
Bansod, Advocate, was also requested to cooperate. It must be noted 
with our appreciation that Smt. Savita B. Ambedkar, Shri Prakash 
Y. Ambedkar and his family members and Shri Bansod, Advocate, all 
showed keen interest, consented to the Government project for publication 
and agreed to transfer all the boxes containing the Ambedkar papers 
to the Government. At last, the Administrator General agreed to 
transfer all the papers contained in five iron trunks to this Committee. 
Accordingly, Shri Vasant Moon took possession of the boxes on behalf of 
the Government of Maharashtra on 18-9-1981. All the five trunks are 
since stored safely in one of the Officers’ Chambers in the Education 
Department of Mantralaya. 

Shri M. B. Chitnis, who, as a close associate of Dr. Ambedkar, 
was intimately familiar with the latter’s handwriting. He was at that 
time Chairman of the Editorial Board. On receipt of the papers, he 
spent a fortnight identifying which of the papers were Dr. Ambedkar’s 
manuscripts. This basic process of identification having been accomplished, 
there remained the stupendous task of reading, interpreting and collating 
the vast range of MS material in the collection, to decide in what form 
and in what order it should be presented to the public. 

In 1981, Shri. Moon, OSD, set to work on this project. This work 
of matching and sorting was a delicate and difficult one as well as 
immensely time-consuming. Many of the works what Dr. Ambedkar 
had evidently intended to complete, were scattered here and there in 
an incomplete state in the manuscript form. It was therefore necessary 
to retrieve and collate the fragments in order to place them in proper 
order. Only after very many hours of reading, selecting and reflecting 
not only on the contents of these papers but also what was already 
known of Dr. Ambedkar’s work and thought, did Shri. Moon arrive at 
the present selection and arrangement of those MS. 


INTRODUCTION 


Xlll 


This task was not merely strenuous at the intellectual level but also 
at the physical one due to the condition of the papers themselves. These 
had been stored in the closed boxes for more than 30 years. They were 
fumigated with insecticides, with the result that a most poisonous foul 
odour emitted from these papers. Shri Moon and his staff had to suffer 
infection of the skin and eyes and required medical treatment. 

After two years of strenuous work, Shri Moon had submitted a detailed 
report to the Editorial Board on 17-9-83 containing recommendations as 
to the proper arrangement and presentation of the papers as they were 
to appear in a published form. The present volume is substantially in 
accordance with these recommendations. 

In the execution of this laborious work, invaluable assistance was 
rendered by the Stenographers Shri Anil Kavale and Shri L. R. Meher, 
and Shri S. A. Mungekar as a clerk. 

After the proposed arrangements had been approved by the 
Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source Material Publication Editorial Committee 
in its meeting Dt. 23-9-86, Shri Moon and his staff took on the tasks 
associated with publication, i.e. proof reading and indexing. 

In the papers that the Editorial Board scrutinised, we have come 
across 51 titles of unpublished writings (including 26 of ‘Riddles in 
Hinduism’). In addition to these, we have received 14 unpublished essays 
of Dr. Ambedkar from Shri S. S. Rege, the Ex-Librarian of the Siddharth 
College, Bombay. The essays received from Shri Rege are shown by 
asterisk in the list mentioned below. Not all these essays are complete. 
All the essays have been divided into three volumes as under : — 

VOLUME 3: 

1. Philosophy of Hinduism 

2. The Hindu Social Order : Its Essential Principles 

3. The Hindu Social Order : Its Unique Features 

4. Symbols of Hinduism 

5. Ancient India on Exhumation 

6. The Ancient Regime — The State of the Aryan Society 

7. A Sunken Priesthood 

8. Reformers and Their Fate 

*9. The Decline and Fall of Buddhism 
10. The Literature of Brahminism 
*11. The Triumph of Brahmanism 

12. The Morals of the House — Manusmriti or the Gospel of 
Counter-Revolution 

13. The Philosophic Defence of Counter-Revolution: Krishna and 
His Gita 

14. Analytical notes of Virat Parva and Uddyog Parva 


XIV 


INTRODUCTION 


15. Brahmins V/s Kshatriyas 

16. Shudras and the Counter-Revolution 

17. The Woman and the Counter-Revolution 

18. Buddha or Karl Marx 

19. Schemes of books. 

VOLUME 4: 

Riddles in Hinduism (27 Chapters including 1 from Shri S. S. Rege) 
VOLUME 5 : 

1. Untouchables or Children of India’s Ghetto 
*2. The House the Hindus have Built 
*3. The Rock on which it is Built 
*4. Why Lawlessness is Lawful ? 

*5. Touchables Vs Untouchables 

*6. Hinduism and the Legacy of Brahminism 

*7. Parallel Cases 

8. Civilization or Felony 

9. The Origin of Untouchability 

10. The Curse of Caste 

*11. From Millions to Fractions 

12. The Revolt of Untouchables 

13. Held at Bay 

14. Away from the Hindus 

15. A Warning to the Untouchables 

16. Caste and Conversion 

*17. Christianizing the Untouchables 
*18. The Condition of the Convert 
*19. Under the Providence of Mr. Gandhi 
*20. Gandhi and His Fast 

In this Introduction we propose to deal with all the questions raised 
about these manuscripts in order to clear the air about the publication 
of all Dr. Ambedkar’s extant writings. 

It is generally believed by the followers of Dr. Ambedkar that 
Dr. Ambedkar had completed the books entitled : (1) Riddles of 
Hinduism, (2) The Buddha and Karl Marx and (3) Revolution and 
Counter-Revolution. The manuscripts of “Riddles of Hinduism” 
have been found in separate chapters bundled together in one file. 
These chapters contain corrections, erasures, alterations, etc. by the 
hands of Dr. Ambedkar himself. Fortunately, the introduction by 
Dr. Ambedkar is also available for this book. We, however, regret that the 


INTRODUCTION 


xv 


final manuscript of this volume has not been found. The Committee has 
accepted the title “Riddles in Hinduism”, given by Dr. Ambedkar in his 
Introduction to the Book. 

“The Buddha and Karl Marx” was also said to have been completed 
by Dr. Ambedkar, but we have not come across such a book among the 
manuscripts. There is, however, a typed copy of a book entitled “Gautam 
the Buddha and Karl Marx” (A Critique and Comparative Study of their 
Systems of Philosophy) by LEUKE — Vijaya Publishing House, Colombo) 
(year of publication not mentioned). One short essay of 34 pages by 
Dr. Ambedkar entitled “Buddha or Karl Marx” was however found 
and being included in the third volume. A third book, viz., “Revolution 
and Counter-Revolution”, was also believed to have been completed by 
Dr. Ambedkar, A printed scheme for this treatise has been found in the 
papers received by the Committee. It appears that Dr. Ambedkar had 
started working on various chapters simultaneously. Scattered pages 
have been found in the boxes and are gathered together. 

We are tempted here to present the process of writing of Dr. Ambedkar 
which will give an idea of the colossal efforts he used to make in the 
writing of a book. He had had his own discipline. He used to make a 
blue-print of the book before starting the text. The Editorial Board found 
many such blue-prints designed by him, viz., “India and Communism”, 
“Riddles in Hinduism”, “Can I be a Hindu?”, “Revolution and Counter- 
Revolution”, “What Brahmins have done to the Untouchables”, “Essays 
on Bhagvat Gita”, “Buddha and Karl Marx”, etc. But some of these were 
not even begun and those which were begun were left incomplete. 

It will be interesting to present an illustration. Dr. Ambedkar had 
prepared a blue-print for a book entitled “India and Communism”. 

The contents are as follows : 

Part — I The Pre-requisites of Communism 
Chapter 1 — The Birth-place of Communism 
Chapter 2 — Communism & Democracy 
Chapter 3 — Communism & Social Order 
Part — II India and the Pre-requisites of Communism 
Chapter 4 — The Hindu Social Order 
Chapter 5 — The Basis of the Hindu Social Order 

Chapter 6 — Impediments to Communism arising from the Social Order. 
Part — III What then shall we do? 

Chapter 1 — Marx and the European Social Order 
Chapter 2 — Manu and the Hindu Social Order. 


XVI 


INTRODUCTION 


Dr. Ambedkar could complete only Chapters 4 and 5 of the scheme viz., “The 
Hindu Social Order” and “The Basis of the Hindu Social Order”. It appears 
that when it struck to him that he should deal with two more topics in Part III 
he added those two topics in his own handwriting on the typed page. In the 
same well-bound file of typed material, there appears a page entitled “Can I be 
a Hindu ?” which bears his signature in pencil and a table of contents on the 
next page as follows : 

Introduction. 

Symbols of Hinduism 

Part-I — Caste 

Part-II — Cults — Worship of Deities 

Part-Ill — Superman. 

The third page bears sub-titles of the chapters as follows: — 

1. Symbols represent the soul of a thing 

2. Symbols of Christianity 

3. Symbols of Islam 

4. Symbols of Jainism 

5. Symbols of Buddhism 

6. Symbols of Hinduism 

7. What are the Symbols of Hinduism ? 

Three 

1. Caste. 

2. Cults — 

(1) Rama 

(2) Krishna 

(3) Shiva 

(4) Vishnu 

3. Service of Superman. 

The plan as designed above remains incomplete except for the chapter on, 
“Symbols of Hinduism”. 

The Editorial Committee has found a chapter on “Riddles of Rama and Krishna” 
which might have been intended for the volume “Riddles in Hinduism”. The 
24 riddles as proposed in his original plan were changed often in blue-prints. 
The seriatim of the contents and chapters and the arrangement of the file do 
not synchronize. The chapter on Rama and Krishna did not find a place in the 
listing of the contents of the book. However, we are including it in the volume 
on Riddles. 

At the end we are confident that our time and our pains will not go unrewarded 
when Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar’s hitherto unpublished works will be brought 
in a proper form before the general public as well as interested scholars. 


INTRODUCTION 


xvn 


We place on record our deep sense of gratitude to Smt. Savita 
B. Ambedkar, Shri. Prakash Y. Ambedkar and his family members for 
granting permission to the Government for publication of all the writings of 
Dr. Ambedkar. Shri. Y. I. Desai, the Administrator General and Custodian 
of Dr. Ambedkar’s Estate deserves our appreciation for transfer of the 
manuscripts to the Government. Shri. J. B. Bansod, an Advocate from 
Nagpur also deserves thanks for co-operating with the Committee. We 
record our deep appreciation of the Late Shri. M. B. Chitnis for sparing 
his valuable time, labour and guidance in his failing health. 

We express our sincere gratitude to Shri Shankarrao Chavan, the 
Hon’ble Chief Minister, Prof. Ram Meghe, the Education Minister, and 
Miss Chandrika Keniya, the Minister of State for Education, Maharashtra 
State, for their decision to publish all the manuscripts. We thank Shri. 
R. S. Gavai, the Vice-President of the Committee and MLC for his 
initiative, guidance and invaluable efforts in solving the Committee’s 
problems. We are also thankful to Shri. Madhusudan Kolhatkar, Secretary, 
Education Department, Maharashtra State, for his valuable advice. We 
thank Shri R. S. Jambhule, Director; Shri. S. A. Deokar, Joint Director; 
Shri. J. B. Kulkarni, Asistant Secretary; Shri. M. M. Awate, Deputy 
Director and Shri E. M. Meshram, Superintendent, all of the Education 
Department, for taking keen interest in the process of publication. 

A special mention needs to be made of Dr. P. T. Borale, Shri S. S. 
Rege, Dr. B. D. Phadke and Shri Daya Pawar, Members of the Committee, 
who met together several times and made invaluable suggestions in 
the editing of this volume. We express our deep appreciation for their 
contribution. 

Shri. S. S. Rege, a Member of this Committee, was kind enough to 
spare the manuscripts of 14 essays of Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar which 
had been in his possession for many years. These essays have enriched 
the material included in these three volumes. The Members of the 
Committee are most indebted to Shri. Rege for his kindness. 

Shri. R. B. Alva, the Director, Shri. G. D Dhond, the Deputy Director, 
Shri. P. S. More, the Manager, Shri. A. C. Sayyad and Shri R. J. 
Mahatekar, the Dy. Managers, Shri. J. S. Nagvekar, Operator Film Setter, 
and the staff of the Department of Printing and Stationery deserve full 
appreciation and thanks for their expeditious printing with utmost care 
and sincerity. 


Bombay 

14th April 1987 


EDITORS 

Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar Source 
Material Publication Committee 
Maharashtra State 


blank 


CONTENTS 


Page 

Foreword (v) 

Preface .. .. (vii) 

Introduction .. .. (xi) 

PART I 

Chapter 1 Philosophy of Hinduism ... 3 

PART II INDIA AND THE PREREQUISITES OF COMMUNISM 

Chapter 2 The Hindu Social Order — Its Eseential Principles 95 

Chapter 3 The Hindu Social Order — Its Unique Features 116 

Chapter 4 Symbols of Hinduism .. .. 130 

PART III REVOLUTION AND COUNTER-REVOLUTION 

Chapter 5 Ancient India on Exhumation .. .. 151 

Chapter 6 The Ancient Regime .. .... 153 

Chapter 7 A Sunken Priesthood .. .. 158 

Chapter 8 Reformers and Their Fate .. .. 165 

Chapter 9 The Decline and Fall of Buddhism .. .. 229 

Chapter 10 The Literature of Brahminism .. .. 239 

Chapter 11 The Triumph of Brahminism .. .. 266 

Chapter 12 The Morals of the House .. .. 332 

Chapter 13 Krishna and His Gita .. .. 357 

Chapter 14 Analytical Notes of Virat Parva and Udyog Parva 381 

Chapter 15 Brahmins Venus Kshatriyas .. .. 392 

Chapter 16 Shudras and the Counter-Revolution .. .. 416 

Chapter 17 The Woman and the Counter-Revolution 429 

PART IV 

Chapter 18 Buddha or Karl Marx .. .. 441 

PART V 

Chapter 19 Schemes of Books .. .. 465 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 


28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


PART I 


Philosophy of 
Hinduism 


This script on Philosophy of Hinduism was 
found as a well-bound copy which we feel is 
complete by itself. The whole script seems to be 
a Chapter of one big scheme. This foolscap 
original typed copy consists of 169 pages . — 
Editors 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


BLANK 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


3 


CHAPTER 1 

Philosophy of 
Hinduism 

I 


What is the philosophy of Hinduism ? This is a question which arises 
in its logical sequence. But apart from its logical sequence its importance 
is such that it can never be omitted from consideration. Without it no 
one can understand the aims and ideals of Hinduism. 

It is obvious that such a study must be preceded by a certain amount 
of what may be called clearing of the ground and defining of the terms 
involved. 

At the outset it may be asked what does this proposed title comprehend ? 
Is this title of the Philosophy of Hinduism of the same nature as that 
of the Philosophy of Religion ? I wish I could commit myself one way 
or the other on this point. Indeed I cannot. I have read a good deal on 
the subject, but I confess I have not got a clear idea of what is meant 
by Philosophy of Religion. This is probably due to two facts. In the first 
place while religion is something definite, there is nothing definite 1 as 
to what is to be included in the term philosophy In the second place 
Philosophy and Religion have been adversaries if not actual antagonists 
as may be seen from the story of the philosopher and the theologian. 
According to the story, the two were engaged in disputation and the 
theologian accused the philosopher that he was “like a blind man in a 
dark room, looking for a black cat which was not there”. In reply the 
philosopher charged the theologian saying that “he was like a blind man 
in the dark room, looking for a black cat which was not there but he 
declared to have found there” Perhaps it is the unhappy chioce of the 
title — Philosophy of Religion — which is responsible for causing confusion 
in the matter of the exact definition of its field. The nearest approach 
to an intelligible statement as to the exact subject matter of Philosophy 
of Religion I find in Prof. Pringle -Pattison who observes 2 : — 


1 See Article on ‘Philosophy’ in Munro’s Encyclopaedia of Education. 

2 The Philosophy of Religion. Oxf. pages 1-2. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


4 


4 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“A few words may be useful at the outset as an indication of 
what we commonly mean by the Philosophy of Religion. Philosophy 
was described long ago by Plato as the synoptic view of things. 
That is to say, it is the attempt to see things together - to keep 
all the main features of the world in view, and to grasp them 
in their relation to one another as parts of one whole. Only 
thus can we acquire a sense of proportion and estimate aright 
the significance of any particular range of facts for our ultimate 
conclusions about the nature of the world-process and the world- 
ground. Accordingly, the philosophy of any particular department 
of experience, the Philosophy of Religion, the Philosophy of Art, 
the Philosophy of Law, is to be taken as meaning an analysis 
and interpretation of the experience in question in its bearing 
upon our view of man and the world in which he lives. And when 
the facts upon which we concentrate are so universal, and in 
their nature so remarkable, as those disclosed by the history of 
religion — the philosophy of man’s religious experience — cannot but 
exercise a determining influence upon our general philosophical 
conclusions. In fact with many writers the particular discussion 
tends to merge in the more general.” 

“The facts with which a philosophy of religion has to deal are 
supplied by the history of religion, in the most comprehensive 
sense of that term. As Tiele puts it, “all religions of the civilized 
and uncivilised world, dead and living”, is a ‘historical and 
psychological phenomenon’ in all its manifestations. These facts, it 
should be noted, constitute the data of the philosophy of religion; 
they do not themselves constitute a ‘philosophy’ or, in Tiele’s use 
of the term, a ‘science’ of religion. ‘If, he says, ‘I have minutely 
described all the religions in existence, their doctrines, myths and 
customs, the observances they inculcate and the organization of 
their adherents, tracing the different religions from their origin 
to their bloom and decay, I have merely collected the materials 
with which the science of religion works’. ‘The historical record, 
however complete, is not enough; pure history is not philosophy. 
To achieve a philosophy of religion we should be able to discover 
in the varied manifestations a common principle to whose roots 
in human nature we can point, whose evolution we can trace by 
itelligible stages from lower to higher and more adequate forms, 
as well as its intimate relations with the other main factors in 
human civilization”. 


If this is Philosophy of Religion it appears to me that it is merely 
a different name for that department of study which is called 
comparative religion with the added aim of discovering a common 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


5 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 5 

principle in the varied manifestations of religion. Whatever be the scope 
and value of such a study, I am using the title Philosophy of Religion 
to denote something quite different from the sense and aim given to it 
by Prof. Pringle-Pattison. I am using the word Philosophy in its original 
sense which was two-fold. It meant teachings as it did when people 
spoke of the philosophy of Socrates or the philosophy of Plato. In another 
sense it meant critical reason used in passing judgments upon things 
and events. Proceeding on this basis Philosophy of Religion is to me 
not a merely descriptive science. I regard it as being both descriptive 
as well as normative. In so far as it deals with the teachings of a 
Religion, Philosophy of Religion becomes a descriptive science. In so far 
as it involves the use of critical reason for passing judgment on those 
teachings, the Philosophy of Religion becomes a normative science. From 
this it will be clear what I shall be concerned with in this study of the 
Philosophy of Hinduism. To be explicit I shall be putting Hinduism on 
its trial to assess its worth as away of life. 

Here is one part of the ground cleared. There remains another part 
to be cleared. That concerns the ascertainment of the factors concerned 
and the definitions of the terms I shall be using. 

A study of the Philosophy of Religion it seems to me involves the 
determination of three dimensions. I call them dimensions because they 
are like the unknown quantities contained as factors in a product. One 
must ascertain and define these dimensions of the Philosophy of Religion 
if an examination of it is to be fruitful. 

Of the three dimensions, Religion is the first. One must therefore 
define what he understands by religion in order to avoid argument 
being directed at cross purposes. This is particularly necessary in the 
case of Religion for the reason that there is no agreement as to its exact 
definition. This is no place to enter upon an elaborate consideration of 
this question. I will therefore content myself by stating the meaning in 
which I am using the word in the discussion which follows. 

I am using the word Religion to mean Theology. This will 
perhaps be insufficient for the purposes of definition. For there are 
different kinds of Theologies and I must particularize which one I 
mean. Historically there have been two Theologies spoken of from 
ancient times. Mythical theology and Civil theology. The Greeks who 
distinguished them gave each a definite content. By Mythical theology 
they meant the tales of gods and their doings told in or implied 
by current imaginative literature. Civil theology according to them 
consisted of the knowledge of the various feasts and fasts of the State 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


6 


6 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Calendar and the ritual apropriate to them. I am not using the word 
theology in either of these two senses of that word. I mean by theology 
natural theology’ which is the doctrine of God and the divine, as an 
integral part of the theory of nature. As traditionally understood there 
are three thesis which ‘natural theology’ propounds. (1) That God exists 
and is the author of what we call nature or universe (2) That God controls 
all the events which make nature and (3) God exercises a government 
over mankind in accordance with his sovereign moral law. 

I am aware there is another class of theology known as Revealed 
Theology — spontaneous self disclosure of divine reality — which may be 
distinguished from Natural theology. But this distinction does not really 
matter. For as has been pointed out 2 that a revelation may either “leave 
the results won by Natural theology standing without modifications, merely 
supplementing them by further knowledge not attainable by unassisted 
human effort” or it “may transform Natural theology in such a way 
that all the truths of natural theology would acquire richer and deeper 
meaning when seen in the light of a true revelation.” But the view that 
a genuine natural theology and a genuine revelational theology might 
stand in real contradiction may be safely excluded as not being possible. 

Taking the three thesis of Theology namely (1) the existence of God, 
(2) God’s providential government of the universe and (3) God’s moral 
government of mankind, I take Religion to mean the propounding of 
an ideal scheme of divine governance the aim and object of which is to 
make the social order in which men live a moral order. This is what I 
understand by Religion and this is the sense in which I shall be using 
the term Religion in this discussion. 

The second dimension is to know the ideal scheme for which a Religion 
stands. To define what is the fixed, permanent and dominant part in 
the religion of any society and to separate its essential characteristics 
from those which are unessential is often very difficult. The reason for 
this difficulty in all probability lies in the difficulty pointed out by Prof. 
Robertson Smith 3 when he says: — 

“The traditional usages of religion had grown up gradually in 
the course of many centuries, and reflected habits of thought, 
characteristic of very diverse stages of man’s intellectual and 
moral development. No conception of the nature of the gods could 
possibly afford the clue to all parts of that motley complex of 
rites and ceremonies which the later paganism had received by 

1 Natural Theology as a distinct department of study owes its origin to Plato-see Laws. 

2 A. E. Taylor. “The Faith of a Moralist” p. 19. 

3 The Religion of the Semites (1927) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


7 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 7 

inheritance, from a series of ancestors in every state of culture from 
pure savagery upwards. The record of the religious thought of mankind, 
as it is embodied in religious institutions, resembles the geological 
record of the history of the earth’s crust; the new and the old are 
preserved side by side, or rather layer upon layer”. 

The same thing has happened in India. Speaking about the growth 
of Religion in India, says Prof. Max Muller : — 

“We have seen a religion growing up from stage to stage, from the 
simplest childish prayers to the highest metaphysical abstractions. In 
the majority of the hymns of the Veda we might recognise the childhood; 
in the Brahmanas and their sacrificial, domestic and moral ordinances 
the busy manhood; in the Upanishads the old age of the Vedic religion. 
We could have well understood if, with the historical progress of the 
Indian mind, they had discarded the purely childish prayers as soon 
as they had arrived at the maturity of the Brahamans; and if, when 
the vanity of sacrifices and the real character of the old gods had 
once been recognised, they would have been superseded by the more 
exalted religion of the Upanishads. But it was not so. Every religious 
thought that had once found expression in India, that had once been 
handed down as a sacred heirloom, was preserved, and the thoughts of 
the three historical periods, the childhood, the manhood, and the old 
age of the Indian nation, were made to do permanent service in the 
three stages of the life of every individual. Thus alone can we explain 
how the same sacred code, the Veda, contains not only the records of 
different phases of religious thought, but of doctrines which we may 
call almost diametrically opposed to each other.” 

But this difficulty is not so great in the case of Religions which 
are positive religions. The fundamental characteristic of positive 
Religions, is that they have not grown up like primitive religions, 
under the action of unconscious forces operating silently from age 
to age, but trace their origin to the teaching of great religious 
innovators, who spoke as the organs of a divine revelation. Being 
the result of conscious formulations the philosophy of a religion 
which is positive is easy to find and easy to state. Hinduism like 
Judaism, Christianity and Islam is in the main a positive religion. 
One does not have to search for its scheme of divine governance. 
It is not like an unwritten constitution. On the Hindu scheme of 
divine governance is enshrined in a written constitution and any 
one who cares to know it will find it laid bare in that Sacred 
Book called the Manu Smriti, a divine Code which lays down 
the rules which govern the religious, ritualistic and social life of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


8 


8 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the Hindus in minute detail and which must be regarded as the Bible 
of the Hindus and containing the philosophy of Hinduism. 

The third dimension in the philosophy of religion is the criterion 1 to be 
adopted for judging the value of the ideal scheme of divine governance 
for which a given Religion stands. Religion must be put on its trial. By 
what criterion shall it be judged? That leads to the definition of the 
norm. Of the three dimensions this third one is the most difficult one 
to be ascertained and defined. 

Unfortunately the question does not appear to have been tackled 
although much has been written on the philosophy of Religion and 
certainly no method has been found for satisfactorily dealing with the 
problem. One is left to one’s own method for determining the issue. 
As for myself I think it is safe to proceed on the view that to know 
the philosophy of any movement or any institution one must study 
the revolutions which the movement or the institution has undergone. 
Revolution is the mother of philosophy and if it is not the mother of 
philosophy it is a lamp which illuminates philosophy. Religion is no 
exception to this rule. To me therefore it seems quite evident that the 
best method to ascertain the criterion by which to judge the philosophy 
of Religion is to study the Revolutions which religion has undergone. 
That is the method which I propose to adopt. 

Students of History are familiar with one Religious Revolution. That 
Revolution was concerned with the sphere of Religion and the extent of its 
authority. There was a time when Religion had covered the whole field of 
human knowledge and claimed infallibility for what it taught. It covered 
astronomy and taught a theory of the universe according to which the earth 
is at rest in the centre of the universe, while the sun, moon, planets and 
system of fixed stars revolve round it each in its own sphere. It included 
biology and geology and propounded the view that the growth of life on 
the earth had been created all at once and had contained from the time 
of creation onwards, all the heavenly bodies that it now contains and all 
kinds of animals of plants. It claimed medicine to be its province and 
taught that disease was either a divine visitation as punishment for sin or 
it was the work of demons and that it could be cured by the intervention 
of saints, either in person or through their holy relics; or by prayers or 

1 Some students of the Philosophy of Religion seem to regard the study of the first two 
dimensions as all that the field of Philosophy of religion need include. They do not seem 
to recognize that a consideration of the third dimension is necessary part of the study 
of the Philosophy of Religion. As an illustration of this see the Article on Theology by 
Mr. D. S. Adamas in ‘Hastings Encyclopedea of Religion and Ethics’ Volume XII page 393. 
I dissent from this view. The difference is probably due to the fact that I regard Philosophy 
of Religion as a normative study and as a discriptive study. I do not think that there can be 
such a thing as a general Philosophy of Religion. I believe each Religion has its particular 
philosophy. To me there is no Philosophy of Religion. There is a philosophy of a Religion. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


9 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 9 

pilgrimages; or (when due to demons) by exorcism and by treatment 
which the demons (and the patient) found disgusting. It also claimed 
physiology and psychology to be its domain and taught that the body 
and soul were two distinct substances. 

Bit by bit this vast Empire of Religion was destroyed. The Copernican 
Revolution freed astronomy from the domination of Religion. The Dar- 
wanian Revolution freed biology and geology from the trammels of Religion. 
The authority of theology in medicine is not yet completely destroyed. 
Its intervention in medical questions still continues. Opinion on such 
subjects as birth-control, abortion and sterilization of the defective are 
still influenced by theological dogmas. Psychology has not completely 
freed itself from its entanglements. None the less Darwinism was such 
a severe blow that the authority of theology was shattered all over 
to such an extent that it never afterwards made any serious effort to 
remain its lost empire. 

It is quite natural that this disruption of the Empire of Religion should 
be treated as a great Revolution. It is the result of the warfare which 
science waged against theology for 400 years, in which many pitched 
battles were faught between the two and the excitement caused by them 
was so great that nobody could fail to be impressed by the revolution 
that was blazing on. 

There is no doubt that this religious revolution has been a great 
blessing. It has established freedom of thought. It has enabled society 
“to assume control of itself, making its own the world it once shared 
with superstition, facing undaunted the things of its former fears, and 
so carving out for itself, from the realm of mystery in which it lies, a 
sphere of unhampered action and a field of independent thought”. The 
process of secularisation is not only welcomed by scientists for making 
civilization — as distinguished from culture — possible, even Religious men 
and women have come to feel that much of what theology taught was 
unnecessary and a mere hindrance to the religious life and that this 
chopping of its wild growth was a welcome process. 

But for ascertaining the norm for judging the philosophy of Religion we 
must turn to another and a different kind of Revolution which Religion 
has undergone. That Revolution touches the nature and content of ruling 
conceptions of the relations of God to man, of Society to man and of man 
to man. How great was this revolution can be seen from the differences 
which divide savage society from civilised society. 

Strange as it may seem no systematic study of this Religious 
Revolution has so far been made. None the less this Revolution 
is so great and so immense that it has brought about a complete 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


10 


10 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

transformation in the nature of Religion as it is taken to be by savage 
society and by civilized society although very few seem to be aware of it. 

To begin with the comparison between savage society and civilized 
society. 

In the religion of the savage one is struck by the presence of two 
things. First is the performance of rites and ceremonies, the practice of 
magic or tabu and the worship of fetish or totem. The second thing that 
is noticeable is that the rites, ceremonies, magic, tabu, totem and fetish 
are conspicuous by their connection with certain occasions. These occasions 
are chiefly those which represent the crises of human life. The events 
such as birth, the birth of the first born, attaining manhood, reaching 
puberty, marriage, sickness, death and war are the usual occasions which 
are marked out for the performance of rites and ceremonies, the use of 
magic and the worship of the totem. 

Students of the origin and history of Religion have sought to explain 
the origin and substance of religion by reference to either magic, tabu 
and totem and the rites and ceremonies connected therewith, and have 
deemed the occasions with which they are connected as of no account. 
Consequently we have theories explaining religion as having arisen in 
magic or as having arisen in fetishism. Nothing can be a greater error 
than this. It is true that savage society practises magic, believes in tabu 
and worships the totem. But it is wrong to suppose that these constitute 
the religion or form the source of religion. To take such a view is to 
elevate what is incidental to the position of the principal. 

The principal thing in the Religion of the savage are the elemental 
facts of human existence such as life, death, birth, marriage etc. Magic, 
tabu, totem are things which are incidental. Magic, tabu, totem, fetish 
etc., are not the ends. They are only the means. The end is life and 
the preservation of life. Magic, tabu etc., are resorted to by the savage 
society not for their own sake but to conserve life and to exercise evil 
influences from doing harm to life. Thus understood the religion of 
the savage society was concerned with life and the preservation of 
life and it is these life processes which constitute the substance and 
source of the religion of the savage society. So great was the concern 
of the savage society for life and the preservation of life that it made 
them the basis of its religion. So central were the life processes in the 
religion of the savage society that everything which affected them be 
came part of its religion. The ceremonies of the savage society were 
not only concerned with the events of birth, attaining of manhood, 
puberty, marriage, sickness, death and war they were also concerned 
with food. Among pastrol peoples the flocks and herds are sacred. Among 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


11 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 11 

agricultural peoples seed time and harvest are marked by ceremonials 
performed with some reference to the growth and the preservation of 
the crops. Likewise drought, pestilence, and other strange, irregular 
phenomena of nature occasion the performance of ceremonials. 
Why should such occasions as harvest and famine be accompanied 
by religious ceremonies? Why is magic, tabu, totem be of such 
importance to the savage. The only answer is that they all affect 
the preservation of life. The process of life and its preservation 
form the main purpose. Life and preservation of life is the core 
and centre of the Religion of the savage society. As pointed out by 
Prof. Crawley the religion of the savage begins and ends with the 
affirmation and conservation of life. 

In life and preservation of life consists the religion of the savage. What 
is however true of the religion of the savage is true of all religions 
wherever they are found for the simple reason that constitutes the 
essence of religion. It is true that in the present day society with its 
theological refinements this essence of religion has become hidden 
from view and is even forgotten. But that life and the preservation of 
life constitute the essence of religion even in the present day society 
is beyond question. This is well illustrated by Prof. Crowley. When 
speaking of the religious life of man in the present day society, he 
says how — 

“a man’s religion does not enter into his professional or social 
hours, his scientific or artistic moments; practically its chief claims 
are settled on one day in the week from which ordinary worldly 
concerns are excluded. In fact, his life is in two parts; but the moiety 
with which religion is concerned is the elemental. Serious thinking on 
ultimate questions of life and death is, roughly speaking, the essence 
of his Sabbath; add to this the habit of prayer, giving the thanks at 
meals, and the subconscious feeling that birth and death, continuation 
and marriage are rightly solemnized by religion, while business and 
pleasure may possibly be consecreted, but only metaphorically or by 
an overflow of religious feeling.” 

Comparing this description of the religious concerns of the man 
in the present day society with that of the savage, who can deny 
that the religion is essentially the same, both in theory and practice 
whether one speaks of the religion of the savage society or of the 
civilized society. 

It is therefore clear that savage and civilized societies agree in 
one respect. In both the central interests of religion — namely in 
the life processes by which individuals are preserved and the race 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


12 


12 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

maintained — are the same. In this there is no real difference between 
the two. But they differ in two other important respects. 

In the first place in the religion of the savage society there is no trace 
of the idea of God. In the second place in the religion of the savage society 
there is no bond between morality and Religion. In the savage society 
there is religion without God. In the savage society there is morality 
but it is indepenent of Religion. 

How and when the idea of God became fused in Religion it is not possible 
to say. It may be that the idea of God had its origin in the worship of 
the Great Man in Society, the Hero — giving rise to theism — with its faith 
in its living God. It may be that the idea of God came into existence 
as a result of the purely philosophical speculation upon the problem 
as to who created life — giving rise to Deism — with its belief in God as 
Architect of the Universe. In any case the idea of God is not integral to 
Religion. How it got fused into Religion it is difficult to explain. With 
regard to the relation between Religion and Morality this much may be 
safely said. Though the relation between God and Religion is not quite 
integral, the relation between Religion and morality is. Both religion 
and morality are connected with the same elemental facts of human 
existence — namely life, death, birth and marriage. Religion consecrates 
these life processes while morality furnishes rules for their preservation. 
Religion in consecrating the elemental facts and processes of life came 
to consecrate also the rules laid down by Society for their preservation. 
Looked at from this point it is easily explained why the bond between 
Religion and Morality took place. It was more intimate and more natural 
than the bond between Religion and God. But when exactly this fusion 
between Religion and Morality took place it is not easy to say. 

Be that as it may, the fact remains that the religion of the Civilized 
Society differs from that of the Savage Society into two important 
features. In civilized society God comes in the scheme of Religion. In 
civilized society morality becomes sanctified by Religion. 

This is the first stage in the Religious Revolution I am speaking of. 
This Religious Revolution must not be supposed to have been ended 
here with the emergence of these two new features in the development 
of religion. The two ideas having become part of the constitution of 
the Religion of the Civilized Society have undergone further changes 
which have revolutionized their meaning and their moral significance. 
The second stage of the Religious Revolution marks a very radical 
change. The contrast is so big that civilized society has become split 

That the idea of God has evolved from both these directions is well illustrated by Hinduism. 
Compare the idea of Indra as God and the idea of Bramha as God. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


13 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 13 

into two, antique society and modern society, so that instead of 
speaking of the religion of the civilized society it becomes necessary 
to speak of the religion of antique society as against the religion of 
modern society. 

The religious revolution which marks off antique society from 
modern society is far greater than the religious revolution which 
divides savage society from civilized society. Its dimensions will be 
obvious from the differences it has brought about in the conceptions 
regarding the relations between God, Society and Man. 

The first point of difference relates to the composition of society. 

Every human being, without choice on his own part, but simply 
in virtue of his birth and upbringing, becomes a member of what we 
call a natural society. He belongs that is to a certain family and a 
certain nation. This membership lays upon him definite obligations 
and duties which he is called upon to fulfil as a matter of course 
and on pain of social penalties and disabilities while at the same 
time it confers upon him certain social rights and advantages. In 
this respect the ancient and modern worlds are alike. But in the 
words of Prof. Smith 1 : — 

“There is this important difference, that the tribal or national societies 
of the ancient world were not strictly natural in the modern sense of 
the word, for the gods had their part and place in them equally with 
men. The circle into which a man was born was not simply a group of 
kinsfolk and fellow citizens, but embraced also certain divine beings, 
the gods of the family and of the state, which to the ancient mind were 
as much a part of the particular community with which they stood 
connected as the human members of the social circle. The relation 
between the gods of antiquity and their worshippers was expressed in 
the language of human relationship, and this language was not taken 
in a figurative sense but with strict literality. If a god was spoken of 
as father and his worshippers as his offsprings, the meaning was that 
the worshippers were literally of his stock, that he and they made 
up one natural family with reciprocal family duties to one another. 
Or, again, if the god was addressed as king, and worshippers called 
themselves his servants, they meant that the supreme guidance of the 
state was actually in his hands, and accordingly the organisation of 
the state included provision for consulting his will and obtaining his 
direction in all weighty matters, also provision for approaching him as 
king with due homage and tribute. 

“Thus a man was born into a fixed relation to certain gods as 
surely as he was born into relation to his fellow men; and his 
1 Smith Ibid 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


14 


14 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

religion, that is, the part of conduct which was determined by his 
relation to the gods, was simply one side of the general scheme of 
conduct prescribed for him by his position as a member of society. There 
was no separation between the spheres of religion and of ordinary life. 
Every social act had a reference to the gods as well as to men, for 
the social body was not made up of men only, but of gods and men.” 

Thus in ancient Society men and their Gods formed a social 
and political as well as a religious whole. Religion was founded 
on kinship between the God and his worshippers. Modern Society 
has eliminated God from its composition. It consists of men only. 

The second point of difference between antique and modern society 
relates to the bond between God and Society. In the antique world 
the various communities 

“believed in the existence of many Gods, for they accepted as real the 
Gods of their enemies as well as their own, but they did not worship 
the strange Gods from whom they had no favour to expect, and on 

whom their gifts and offerings would have been thrown away Each 

group had its own God, or perhaps a God and Goddess, to whom the 
other Gods bore no relation whatever .” 1 

The God of the antique society was an exclusive God. God was 
owned by and bound to one singly community. This is largely to 
be accounted for by 

“the share taken by the Gods in the feuds and wars of their 
worshippers. The enemies of the God and the enemies of his people 
are identical; even in the Old Testament ‘the enemies of Jehovah’ 
are originally nothing else than the enemies of Israel. In battle each 
God fights for his own people, and to his aid success is ascribed; 
Chemosh gives victory to Moab, and Asshyr to Assyria; and often 
the divine image or symbol accompanies the host to battle. When 
the ark was brought into the camp of Israel, the Philistines said, 
“Gods are come into the camp; who can deliver us from their own 
practice, for when David defeated them at Baalperazim, part of the 
booty consisted in their idols which had been carried into the field. 
When the Carthaginians, in their treaty with Phillip of Macedon, 
speak of “the Gods that take part in the campaign, “they doubtless 
refer to the inmates of the sacred tent which was pitched in time of 
war beside the tent of the general, and before which prisoners were 
sacrificed after a victory. Similarly an Arabic poet says, “Yaguth went 
forth with us against Morad” ; that is, the image of the God Yaguth 
was carried into the fray” 


Smith Ibid 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


15 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 15 

This fact had produced a solidarity between God and the community. 

“Hence, on the principle of solidarity between Gods and their 
worshippers, the particularism characteristic of political society could 
not but reappear in the sphere of religion. In the same measure as 
the God of a clan or town had indisputable claim to the reverance and 
service of the community to which he belonged, he was necessarily an 
enemy to their enemies and a stranger to those to whom they were 
strangers”. 1 

God had become attached to a community, and the community 
had become attached to their God. God had become the God of the 
Community and the Community had become the chosen community 
of the God. 

This view had two consequences. Antique Society never came to 
conceive that God could be universal God, the God of all. Antique 
Society never could conceive that there was any such thing as humanity 
in general. 

The third point of difference between ancient and modern society, 
has reference to the conception of the fatherhood of God. In the antique 
Society God was the Father of his people but the basis of this conception 
of Fatherhood was deemed to be physical. 

“In heathen religions the Fatherhood of the Gods is physical 
fatherhood. Among the Greeks, for example, the idea that the Gods 
fashioned men out of clay, as potters fashion images, is relatively 
modern. The older conception is that the races of men have Gods for 
their ancestors, or are the children of the earth, the common mother 
of Gods and men, so that men are really of the stock or kin of the 
Gods. That the same conception was familiar to the older Semites 
appears from the Bible. Jeremiah describes idolaters as saying to 
a stock, Thou art my father; and to a stone, Thou hast brought me 
forth. In the ancient poem, Num. xxi. 29, The Moabites are called the 
sons and daughters of Chemosh, and at a much more recent date the 
prophet Malachi calls a heathen woman “the daughter of a strange 
God”. These phrases are doubtless accommodations to the language 
which the heathen neighbours of Israel used about themselves. In Syria 
and Palestine each clan, or even complex of clans forming a small 
independent people, traced back its origin to a great first father; and 
they indicate that, just as in Greece this father or progenitor of the race 
was commonly identified with the God of the race. With this it accords 
that in the judgment of most modern enquirers several names of deities 
appear in the old genealogies of nations in the Book of Genesis. Edom, 


Smith Ibid 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


16 


16 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

for example, the progenitor of the Edomites, was identified by the 
Hebrews with Esau the brother of Jacob, but to the heathen he was 
a God, as appears from the theophorous proper name Obededom, 
“worshipper of Edom”, the extant fragments of Phoenician and 
Babylonian cosmogonies date from a time when tribal religion and the 
connection of individual Gods with particular kindreds was forgotten or 
had fallen into the background. But in a generalised form the notion 
that men are the offspring of the Gods still held its ground. In the 
Phoenician cosmogony of Philo Bablius it does so in a confused shape, 
due to the authors euhemerism, that is, to his theory that deities are 
nothing more than deified men who had been great benefactors to 
their species. Again, in the Chaldaean legend preserved by Berosus, 
the belief that men are of the blood of the Gods is expressed in a 
form too crude not to be very ancient; for animals as well as men 
are said to have been formed out of clay mingled with the blood of 
a decapitated deity.” 1 

This conception of blood kinship of Gods and men had one 
important consequence. To the antique world God was a human 
being and as such was not capable of absolute virtue and absolute 
goodness. God shared the physical nature of man and was afflicted 
with the passions infirmities and vices to which man was subject. 
The God of the qntique world had all the wants and appetites of 
man and he often indulged in the vices in which many revelled. 
Worshipers had to implore God not to lead them into temptations. 

In modern Society the idea of divine fatherhood has become 
entirely dissociated from the physical basis of natural fatherhood. 
In its place man is conceived to be created in the image of God; he 
is not deemed to be begotten by God. This change in the conception 
of the fatherhood of God looked at from its moral aspect has made 
a tremendous difference in the nature of God as a Governor of the 
Universe. God with his physical basis was not capable of absolute 
good and absolute virtue. With God wanting in righteousness the 
universe could not insist on righteousness as an immutable principle. 
This dissociation of God from physical contact with man has made 
it possible for God to be conceived of as capable of absolute good 
and absolute virtue. 

The fourth point of difference relates to the part religion plays 
when a change of nationality takes place. 

In the antique world there could be no change of nationality unless 
it was accompanied by a change of Religion. In the antique world, 


Smith Ibid 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


17 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 17 

“It was impossible for an individual to change his religion without 
changing his nationality, and a whole community could hardly change 
its religion at all without being absorbed into another stock or nation. 
Religions like political ties were transmitted from father to son; for a 
man could not choose a new God at will; the Gods of his fathers were 
the only deities on whom he could count as friendly and ready to accept 
his homage, unless he forswore his own kindred and was received into 
a new circle of civil as well as religious life.” 

How change of religion was a condition precedent to a Social fusion 
is well illustrated by the dialogue between Naomi and Ruth in the Old 
Testament. 

“Thy Sister” says Naomi to Ruth, “is gone back unto her people and 
unto her Gods” ; and Ruth replies, “Thy people shall be my people and 
thy God my God.” 

It is quite clear that in the ancient world a change of nationality 
involved a change of cult. Social fusion meant religious fusion. 

In modern society abandonment of religion or acceptance of another 
is not necessary for social fusion. This is best illustrated by what is in 
modern terminology and naturalization, whereby the citizen of one state 
abandons his citizenship of the state and becomes a citizen of a new 
state. In this process of naturalization religion has no place. One can 
have a social fusion — which is another name for naturalization — without 
undergoing a religious fusion. 

To distinguish modern society from antique society it is not enough 
to say that Modern Society consists of men only. It must be added that 
it consists of men who are worshippers of different Gods. 

The fifth point of difference relates to the necessity of knowledge as 
to the nature of God as part of religion. 

“From the antique point of view, indeed the question what the Gods 
are in themselves is not a religious but a speculative one; what is 
requisite to religion is a practical acquaintance with the rules on which 
the deity acts and on which he expects his worshippers to frame their 
conduct — what in 2 Kings xvii. 26 is called the “manner” or rather the 
“customary law” (misphat) of the God of the land. This is true even of 
the religion of Israel. When the prophets speak of the knowledge of 
the laws and principles of His government in Israel, and a summary 
expression for religion as a whole is “the knowledge and fear of Jehovah,” 
i.e. the knowledge of what Jehovah prescribes, combined with a reverent 
obedience. An extreme scepticism towards all religious speculation is 
recommended in the Book of Ecclesiastes as the proper attitude of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


18 


18 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

piety, for no amount of discussion can carry a man beyond the plain 
rule, to “fear God and keep His Commandments”. This counsel 
the author puts into the mouth of Solomon, and so represents it, 
not unjustly, as summing up the old view of religion, which in 
more modern days had unfortunately begun to be undermined.” 

The sixth point of difference relates to the place of belief in 
Religion. 

In ancient Society : — 

“ritual and practical usages were, strictly speaking, the sum 
total of ancient religions. Religion in primitive times was not a 
system of belief with practical applications; it was a body of fixed 
traditional practices, to which every member of society conformed 
as a matter of courage. Men would not be men if they agreed to 
do certain things without having a reason for their action; but in 
ancient religion the reason was not first formulated as a doctrine 
and then expressed in practice, but conversely, practice preceded 
doctrinal theory. Men form general rule of conduct before they 
begin to express general principles in words; political institutions 
are older than political theories and in like manner religious 
institutions are older than religious theories. This analogy is not 
arbitrarily chosen, for in fact the parallelism in ancient society 
between religious and political institutions is complete. In each 
sphere great importance was attached to form and precedent, but 
the explanation why the precedent was followed consisted merely 
of legend as to its first establishment. That the precedent, once 
established, was authoritative did not appear to require any proof. 

The rules of society were based on precedent, and the continued 
existence of the society was sufficient reason why a precedent 
once set should continue to be followed.” 

The seventh point of difference relates to the place of individual 
conviction in Religion. In ancient Society: — 

“Religion was a part of the organised social life into which 
a man was born, and to which he conformed through life in 
the same unconscious way in which men fall into any habitual 
practice of the society in which they live. Men took the Gods 
and their worship for granted, just as they took the other usages 
of the state for granted, and if they reason or speculated about 
them, they did so on the presupposition that the traditional 
usages were fixed things, behind which their reasonings must 
not go, and which no reasoning could be allowed to overturn. 

To us moderns religion is above all a matter of individual 
conviction and reasoned belief, but to the ancients it was a 
part of the citizen’s public life, reduced to fixed forms, which 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


19 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 


19 


he was not bound to understand and was not at liberty to criticise 
or to neglect. Religious non-conformity was an offence against the 
state; for if sacred tradition was tampered with the bases of society 
were undermined, and the favour of the Gods was forfeited. But 
so long as the prescribed forms were duly observed, a man was 
recognised as truly pious, and no one asked how his religion was 
rooted in his heart or affected his reason. Like political duty, of 
which indeed it was a part, religion was entirely comprehended in 
the observance of certain fixed rules of outward conduct.” 

The eighth point of difference pertains to the relation of God to Society 
and man, of Society to Man in the matter of God’s Providence. 

First as to the difference in the relation of God to Society. In this 
connection three points may be noted. 

The faith of the antique world 

“Sought nothing higher than a condition of physical bien etre.... 

The good things desired of the Gods were the blessings of earthly 
life, not spiritual but carnal things.” What the antique societies 
asked and believed themselves to receive from their God lay mainly 
in the following things: 

“Abundent harvests, help against their enemies and counsel by 
oracles or scoothsayers in matters of natural difficulty.” 

In the antique world 

“Religion was not the affair of the individual but of the 
Community.... It was the community, and not the individual, that 
was sure of the permanent and the unfailing hand of the deity.” 

Next as to the difference in the relation of God to man. 

“It was not the business of the Gods of heathenism to watch, by 
a series of special providences, over the welfare of every individual. 

It is true that individuals laid their private affairs before the Gods, 
and asked with prayers and views for strictly personal blessings. 

But they did this just as they might crave a personal boon from a 
king, or as a son craves a boon from a father, without expecting 
to get all that was asked. What the Gods might do in this way 
was done as a matter of personal favour, and was no part of their 
proper function as heads of the community.” 

“The Gods watched over a man’s civic life, they gave him his 
share in public benefits, the annual largess of the harvest and the 
vintage, national peace or victory over enemies, and so forth, but 
they were not sure helpers in every private need, and above all they 
would not help him in matters that were against the interests of 
the community as a whole. There was therefore a whole region of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


20 


20 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


possible, needs and desires for which religion could and would do 
nothing.” 

Next the difference in the attitude of God and Society to man. 

In the antique world Society was indifferent to individual welfare. 

God was no doubt bound to Society. But 

“The compact between the God and his worshippers was not held 
to pledge the deity to make the private cares of each member of the 
Community his own.” 

“The benefits expected of God were of a public character affecting the 
whole community, especially fruitful seasons, increase of flocks of herds 
and success in war. So long as community flourished the fact that an 
individual was miserable reflected no discredit on divine providence.” 

On the contrary the antique world looked upon the misery of a man 
as proof. 

“That the sufferer was an evil-doer, justly hateful to the Gods. Such 
a man was out of place among the happy and the prosperous crowd that 
assembled on feast days before the alter.” 

It is in accordance with this view that the leper and the mourner were 
shut out from the exercise of religion as well as from the privileges of 
social life and their food was not brought into the house of God. 

As for conflict between individual and individual and between society 
and the individual God had no concern. In the antique world: 

“It was not expected that (God) should always be busy righting human 
affairs. In ordinary matters it was men’s business to help themselves 
and their own kins folk, though the sense that the God was always 
near, and could be called upon at need, was a moral force continually 
working in some degree for the maintenance of social righteousness and 
order. The strength of this moral force was indeed very uncertain, for it 
was always possible for the evil-doer to flatter himself that his offence 
would be overlooked.” 

In the antique world man did not ask God to be righteous to him. 

“Whether in civil or in profane matters, the habit of the old world 
was to think much of the community and little of the individual life, 
and no one felt this to be unjust even though it bore hardly on himself. 
The God was the God of the nationl or of the tribe, and he knew and 
cared for the individual only as a member of the community.” 

That was the attitude that man in the antique world took of his own 
private misfortune. Man came to rejoice before his God and 

“in rejoicing before his God man rejoiced with and for the welfare 
of his kindred, his neighbours and his country, and, in renewing by 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


21 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 21 

a solemn act of worship the bond that united him to God, he also renewed 

the bonds of family, social and national obligation.” 

Man in the antique world did not call upon his maker to be righteous 
to him. 

Such is this other Revolution in Religion. 

There have thus been two Religious Revolutions. One was an external 
Revolution. The other was an internal Revolution. The External Revolution 
was concerned with the field within which the authority of Religion 
was to prevail. The Internal Revolution had to do with the changes 
in Religion as a scheme of divine Governance for human society. The 
External Revolution was not really a Religious Revolution at all. It was 
a revolt of science against the extra territorial jurisdiction assumed by 
Religion over a field which did not belong. The Internal Revolution was 
a real Revolution or may be compared to any other political Revolution, 
such as the French Revolution or the Russian Revolution. It involved a 
constitutional change. By this Revolution the Scheme of divine governance 
came to be altered, amended and reconstituted. 

How profound have been the changes which this internal Revolution, 
has made in the antique scheme of divine governance can be easily seen. 
By this Revolution God has ceased to be a member of a community. 
Thereby he has become impartial. God has ceased to be the Father of 
Man in the physical sense of the word. He has become the creator of 
the Universe. The breaking of this blood bond has made it possible to 
hold that God is good. By this Revolution man has ceased to be a blind 
worshipper of God doing nothing but obeying his commands. Thereby 
man has become a responsible person required to justify his belief in 
God’s commandments by his conviction. By this Revolution God has 
ceased to be merely the protector of Society and social interests in gross 
have ceased to be the centre of the divine Order. Society and man have 
changed places as centres of this divine order. It is man who has become 
the centre of it. 

All this analysis of the Revolution in the Ruling concepts of 
Religion as a scheme of divine governance had one purpose namely 
to discover the norm for evaluating the philosophy of a Religion. The 
impatient reader may not ask where are these norms and what are 
they? The reader may not have found the norms specified by their 
names in the foregoing discussion. But he could not have failed to 
notice that the whole of this Religious Revolution was raging around 
the norms for judging what is right and what is wrong. If he has 
not, let me make explicit what has been implicit in the whole of this 
discussion. We began with the distinction between antique society and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


22 


22 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

modern society as has been pointed out they differed in the type of 
divine governance they accepted as their Religious ideals. At one end of 
the Revolution was the antique society with its Religious ideal in which 
the end was Society. At the other end of the Revolution is the modern 
Society with its Religious ideal in which the end is the & individual. To 
put the same fact in terms of the norm it can be said that the norm or 
the criterion, for judging right and wrong in the Antique Society was 
utility while the norm or the criterion for judging right and wrong in 
the modern Society is justice. The Religious Revolution was not thus a 
revolution in the religious organization of Society resulting in the shifting 
of the centre — from society to the individual — it was a revolution in the 
norms. 

Some may demur to the norms I have suggested. It may be that it 
is a new way of reaching them. But to my mind there is no doubt that 
they are the real norms by which to judge the philosophy of religion. 
In the first place the norm must enable people to judge what is right 
and wrong in the conduct of men. In the second place the norm must 
be appropriate to current notion of what constitutes the moral good. 
From both these points of view they appear to be the true norms. They 
enable us to judge what is right and wrong. They are appropriate to 
the society which adopted them. Utility as a criterion was appropriate 
to the antique world in which society being the end, the moral good 
was held to be something which had social utility. Justice as a criterion 
became appropriate to the Modern World in which individual being the 
end, the moral good was held to be something which does justice to the 
individual. There may be controversy as to which of the two norms is 
morally superior. But I do not think there can be any serious controversy 
that these are not the norms. If it is said that these norms are not 
transcendental enough; my reply is that if a norm whereby one is to 
judge the philosophy of religion must be Godly, it must also be earthly. 
At any rate these are the norms I propose to adopt in examining the 
philosophy of Hinduism. 

II 

This is a long detour. But it was a necessary preliminary to any 
inquiry into the main question. However, when one begins the inquiry 
one meets with an initial difficulty. The Hindu is not prepared to face 
the inquiry. He either argues that religion is of no importance or he 
takes shelter behind the view — fostered by the study of comparative 
Religion — that all religions are good. There is no doubt that both these 
views are mistaken and untenable. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


23 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 23 

Religion as a social force cannot be ignored. Religion has been aptly 
described by Hebert Spencer as “the weft which everywhere crosses the 
warp of history”. This is true of every Society. But Religion has not only 
crossed everywhere the warp of Indian History it forms the warp and 
woof of the Hindu mind. The life of the Hindu is regulated by Religion 
at every moment of his life. It orders him how during life he should 
conduct himself and how on death his body shall be ; disposed of. It tells 
him how and when he shall indulge in his sexual impulses. It tells him 
what ceremonies are to be performed when ; a child is born — how he 
should name, how he should cut the hair on its head, how he should 
perform its first feeding. It tells him what occupation he can take to, 
what woman he should marry. It tells him with whom he should dine 
and what food he should eat, what vegetables are lawful and what 
are forbidden. It tells how he should spend his day, how many times 
he should eat, how many times he should pray. There is no act of the 
Hindu which is not covered or ordained by Religion. It seems strange 
that the educated Hindus should come to look upon it as though it was 
a matter of indifference. 

Besides, Religion is a social force. As I have pointed out Religion stands 
for a scheme of divine governance. The scheme becomes an ideal for society 
to follow. The ideal may be non-existent in the sense that it is something 
which is constructed. But although non-existent, it is real. For an ideal it 
has full operative force which is inherent in every ideal. Those who deny 
the importance of religion not only forget this, they also fail to realize 
how great is the potency and sanction that lies behind a religious ideal 
as compound with that of a purely secular ideal. This is probably due to 
the lag which one sees between the real and the ideal which is always 
present whether the ideal is religious or secular. But the relative potency 
of the two ideals is to be measured by another test — namely their power 
to override the practical instincts of man. The ideal is concerned with 
something that is remote. The practical instincts of man are concerned with 
the immediate present. Now placed as against the force of the practical 
instincts of man the two ideals show their difference in an unmistaken 
manner. The practical instincts of man do yield to the prescriptions of 
a religious ideal however much the two are opposed to each other. The 
practical instincts of man do not on the other hand yield to the secular 
ideal if the two are in conflict. This means that a religious ideal has a 
hold on mankind, irrespective of an earthly gain. This can never be said 
of a purely secular ideal. Its power depends upon its power to confer 
material benefit. This shows how great is the difference in the potency 
and sanction of the two ideals over the human mind. A religious ideal 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


24 


24 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

never fails to work so long as there is faith in that ideal. To ignore 
religion is to ignore a live wire. 

Again to hold that all religions are true and good is to cherish a belief 
which is positively and demonstrably wrong. This belief, one is sorry to 
say, is the result of what is known as the study of comparative religion. 
Comparative religion has done one great service to humanity. It has 
broken down the claim and arrogance of revealed religions as being the 
only true and good religions of study. While it is true that comparative 
religion has abrogated the capricious distinction between true and false 
religions based on purely arbitrary and a priori considerations, it has 
brought in its wake some false notions about religion. The most harmful 
one is the one I have mentioned namely that all religions are equally 
good and that there is no necessity of discriminating between them. 
Nothing can be a greater error than this. Religion is an institution or 
an influence and like all social influences and institutions, it may help 
or it may harm a society which is in its grip. As pointed out by Prof. 
Tiele 1 religion is 

“one of the mightiest motors in the history of mankind, which formed 
as well as tore asunder nations, united as well as divided empires, which 
sanctioned the most atrocious and barbarous deeds, the most libinous 
customs, inspired the most admirable acts of heroism, self renunciation, 
and devotion, which occasioned the most sanguinary wars, rebellions 
and persecutions, as well as brought about the freedom, happiness and 
peace of nations — at one time a partisan of tyranny, at another breaking 
its chains, now calling into existence and fostering a new and brilliant 
civilization, then the deadly foe to progress, science and art.” 

A force which shows such a strange contrast in its result can be 
accepted as good without examining the form it takes and the ideal it 
serves. Everything depends upon what social ideal a given religion as a 
divine scheme of governance hold out. This is a question which is not 
avowed by the science of comparative religion. Indeed it begins where 
comparative religion ends. The Hindu is merely trying to avoid it by 
saying that although religions are many they are equally good. For they 
are not. 

However much the Hindu may seek to burke the inquiry into the 
philosophy of Hinduism there is no escape. He must face it. 

Ill 

Now to begin with the subject. I propose to apply both the tests, 
the test of justice and the test of utility to judge the philosophy of 

1 Quoted by Crowby Tree of Life, page 5. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


25 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 25 

Hinduism. First I will apply the test of justice. Before doing so I want to 
explain what I mean by the principle of justice. No one has expounded 
it better than Professor Bergbon 1 . As interpreted by him the principle 
of justice is a compedious one and includes most of the other principles 
which have become the foundation of a moral order Justice has always 
evoked ideas of equality, of proportion of’ compensation”. Equity signifies 
equality. Rules and regulations, right and righteousness are concerned 
with equality in value. If all men are equal, all men are of the same 
essence and the common essence entitled them to the same fundamental 
rights and to equal liberty. 

In short justice is simply another name for liberty equality and 
fraternity. It is in this sense I shall be using 2 justice as a criterion to 
judge Hinduism. 

Which of these tenets does Hinduism recognize? Let us take the 
question one by one. 

I. Does Hinduism recognise Equality? 

The question instantaneously brings to one’s mind the caste system. 
One striking feature of the caste system is that the different castes do 
not stand as an horizontal series all on the same plane. It is a system 
in which the different castes are placed in a vertical series one above 
the other. Manu may not be responsible for the creation of caste. Manu 
preached the sanctity of the Varna and as I have shown Varna is the 
parent of caste. In that sense Manu can be charged with being the 
progenitor if not the author of the Caste System. Whatever be the case 
as to the guilt of Manu regarding the Caste System there can be no 
question that Manu is responsible for upholding the principle of gradation 
and rank. 

In the scheme of Manu the Brahmin is placed at the first in rank. Below 
him is the Kshatriya. Below Kshatriya is the Vaishya. Below Vaishya is 
the Shudra and Below Shudra is the Ati-Shudra (the Untouchables). This 
system of rank and gradation is, simply another way of enunciating the 
principle of inequality so that it may be truly said that Hinduism does not 
recognise equality. This inequality in status is not merely the inequality 
that one sees in the warrant of precedence prescribed for a ceremonial 
gathering at a King’s Court. It is a permanent social relationship among 
the classes to be observed — to be enforced — at all times in all places and 
for all purposes. It will take too long to show how in every phase of life 
Manu has introduced and made inequality the vital force of life. But I will 

'Two Moralities page. 

2 For another interpretation of justice see J. S. Mill — Utilitarianism. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


26 


26 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

illustrate it by taking a few examples such as slavery, marriage and 
Rule of Law. 

Manu recognizes 1 Slavery. But he confined it to the Shudras. Only 
Shudras could be made slaves of the three higher classes. But the higher 
classes could not be the slaves of the Shudra. 

But evidently practice differed from the law of Manu and not only 
Shudras happened to become slaves but members of the other three 
classes also become slaves. When this was discovered to be the case a 
new rule was enacted by a Successor of Manu namely Narada 2 . This 
new rule of Narada runs as follows: — 

V 39. In the inverse order of the four castes slavery is not ordained 
except where a man violates the duties peculiar to his caste. Slavery 
(in that respect) is analogous to the condition of a wife.” 

Recognition of slavery was bad enough. But if the rule of slavery had 
been left free to take its own course it would have had at least one 
beneficial effect. It would have been a levelling force. The foundation of 
caste would have been destroyed. For under it a Brahmin might have 
become the slave of the Untouchable and the Untouchable would have 
become the master of the Brahmin. But it was seen that unfettered 
slavery was an equalitarian principle and an attempt was made to 
nullify it. Manu and his successors therefore while recognizing slavery 
ordain that it shall not be recognized in its inverse order to the Varna 
System. That means that a Brahmin may become the slave of another 
Brahmin. But he shall not be the slave of a person of another Varna i.e. 
of the Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra, or Ati-Shudra. On the other hand a 
Brahmin may hold as his slave any one belonging to the four Varnas. A 
Kshatriya can have a Kshatriya, Vaisha, Shudra and Ati-Shudra as his 
slaves but not one who is a Brahmin. A Vaishya can have a Vaishya, 
Shudra and Ati-Shudra as his slaves but not one who is a Brahmin 
or a Kshatriya. A Shudra can hold a Shudra and Ati-shudra can hold 
an Ati-Shudra as his slave but not one who is a Brahmin, Kshatriya, 
Vaishya or Shudra. 

Consider Manu on marriage. Here are his rules governing intermarriage 
among the different classes. 

Manu says: — 

III. 12. “For the first marriage of the twice born classes, a woman 
of the same class is recommended but for such as are impelled by 
inclination to marry again, women in the direct order of the classes 
are to be preferred.” 

1 Manu recognizes seven kinds of slaves (VIII-415). Narada recognizes fifteen kinds of 
slaves (V-25) 

2 The same rule is laid down by Yajnavalkya (11-183) whose authority is equal to that of 
Manu. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


27 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 27 

III. 13. “A Shudra woman only must be the wife of Shudra: she 
and a Vaisya, of a Vaisya; they two and a Kshatriya, of a Kshatriya; 
those two and a Brahmani of a Brahman.” 

Manu is of course opposed to intermarriage. His injunction is 
for each class to marry within his class. But he does recognize 
marriage outside the defined class. Here again he is particularly 
careful not to allow intermarriage to do harm to his principle of 
inequality among classes. Like Slavery he permits intermarriage 
but not in the inverse order. A Brahmin when marrying outside 
his class may marry any woman from any of the classes below him. 
A Kshatriya is free to marry a woman from the two classes next 
below him namely the Vaishya and Shudra but must not marry 
a woman from the Brahmin class which is above him. A Vaishya 
is free to marry a woman from the Shudra Class which is next 
below him. But he cannot marry a woman from the Brahmin and 
the Kshatriya Class which are above him. 

Why this discrimination ? The only answer is that Manu was 
most anxious to preserve the rule of inequality which was his 
guiding principle. 

Take Rule of Law. Rule of Law is generally understood to mean 
equality before law. Let any one interested to know what Manu 
has to say on the point ponder over the following Rules extracted 
from his code which for easy understanding I have arranged under 
distinct headings. 

As to witnesses . — According to Manu they are to be sworn as 
follows: — 

VIII. 87. “In the forenoon let the judge, being purified, severally 
call on the twice-born, being purified also, to declare the truth, in the 
presence of some image, a symbol of the divinity and of Brahmens, 
while the witnesses turn their faces either to the north or to the east.” 

VIII. 88. “To a Brahman he must begin with saying, ‘Declare’; 
to a Kshatriya, with saying, ‘Declare the truth’; to a Vaisya, with 
comparing perjury to the crime of stealing kine, grain or gold; to a 
Sudra, with comparing it in some or all of the following sentences, 
to every crime that men can commit.” 

VIII. 113. “Let the judge cause a priest to swear by his veracity; a 
soldier, by his horse, or elephant, and his weapons; a merchant, by 
his kine, grain, and gold; a mechanic or servile man, by imprecating 
on his own head, if he speak falsely, all possible crimes;” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


28 


28 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Manu also deals with cases of witnesses giving false evidence. According 
to Manu giving false evidence is a crime, says Manu: — 

VIII. 122. “Learned men have specified these punishments, which 
were ordained by sage legislators for perjured witnesses, with a view 
to prevent a failure of justice and to restrain iniquity.” 

VIII. 123. “Let a just prince banish men of the three lower classes, 
if they give false evidence, having first levied the fine; but a Brahman 
let him only banish. 

But Manu made one exception: — 

VIII. 112. “To women, however, at a time of dalliance, or on a proposal 
of marriage, in the case of grass or fruit eaten by a cow, of wood taken 
for a sacrifice, or of a promise made for the preservation of a Brahman, 
it is deadly sin to take a light oath.” 

As parties to proceedings — Their position can be illustrated by quoting 
the ordinances of Manu relating to a few of the important criminal 
offences dealt with by Manu. 

Take the offence of Defamation. Manu says: — 

VIII. 267. “A soldier, defaming a priest, shall be fined a hundred 
panas, a merchant, thus offending, an hundred and fifty, or two hundred; 
but, for such an offence, a mechanic or servile man shall be shipped.” 

III. 268. “A priest shall be fined fifty, if he slander a soldier; twenty 
five, if a merchant; and twelve, if he slander a man of the servile class.” 
Take the offence of Insult — Manu says: — 

VIII. 270. “A once born man, who insults the twice-born with gross 
invectives, ought to have his tongue slit; for he sprang from the lowest 
part of Brahma.” 

VIII. 271. “If he mention their names and classes with contumely, as 
if he say,” Oh Devadatta, though refuse of Brahmin, “an iron style, ten 
fingers long, shall be thrust red into his mouth.” 

VIII. 272. “Should he, through pride, give instruction to priests 
concerning their duty, let the king order some hot oil to be dropped 
into his mouth and his ear.” 

Take the offence of Abuse — Manu says: — 

VIII. 276. “For mutual abuse by a priest and a soldier, this fine must 
be imposed by a learned king; the lowest amercement on the priest, and 
the middle-most on the soldier.” 

VIII. 277. “Such exactly, as before mentioned, must be the punishment 
a merchant and a mechanic, in respect of their several 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


29 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 29 

classes, except the slitting of the tongue; this is a fixed rule of 
punishment.” 

Take the offence of Assault — Manu propounds: — 

VIII. 279. “With whatever member a low-born man shall assault or 
hurt a superior, even that member of his must be slit, or cut more or 
less in proportion to the injury; this is an ordinance of Manu.” 

VIII. 280. “He who raises his hand or a staff against another, shall 
have his hand cut; and he, who kicks another in wrath, shall have an 
incision made in his foot.” 

Take the offence of Arrogance — According to Manu: — 

VIII. 281. “A man of the lowest class, who shall insolently place 
himself on the same seat with one of the highest, shall either be 
banished with a mark on his hinder parts, or the king, shall cause a 
gash to be made on his buttock.” 

VIII. 282. “Should he spit on him through price, the king shall order 
both his lips to be gashed; should he urine on him, his penis: should 
he break wing against him, his anus.” 

VIII. 283. “If he seize the Brahman by the locks, or by the feet, or 
by the beard, or by the throat, or by the scrotum, let the king without 
hesitation cause incisions to be made in his hands.” Take the offence 
of Adultery. Says Manu: — 

VIII. 359. “A man of the servile class, who commits actual adultery 
with the wife of a priest, ought to suffer death; the wives, indeed, of 
all the four classes must ever be most especially guarded.” 

VIII. 366. “A low man, who makes love to a damsel of high birth, 
ought to be punished corporally; but he who addresses a maid of equal 
rank, shall give the nuptial present and marry her, if her father please.” 

VIII. 374. “A mechanic or servile man, having an adulterous 
connection with a woman of a twice-born class, whether guarded at 
home or unguarded, shall thus be punished; if she was unguarded, 
he shall lose the part offending, and his whole substance; if guarded, 
and a priestless, every thing, even his life.” 

VIII. 375. “For adultery with a guarded priestess, a merchant shall 
forfeit all his wealth after imprisonment for a year; a soldier shall be 
fined a thousand panas, and he be shaved with the urine of an ass.” 

VIII. 376. “But, if a merchant or soldier commit adultery with a 
woman of the sacredotal class, whom her husband guards not at home, 
the king shall only fine the merchant five hundred, and the soldier 
a thousand;” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


30 


30 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

VIII. 377. “Both of them, however, if they commit that offence with 
a priestess not only guarded but eminent for good qualities, shall be 
punished like men of the servile class, or be burned in a fire of dry 
grass or reeds.” 

VIII. 382. “If a merchant converse criminally with a guarded woman 
of the military, or a soldier with one of the mercantile class, they both 
deserve the same punishment as in the case of a priestess unguarded.” 

VIII. 383. “But a Brahman, who shall commit adultery with a guarded 
woman of those two classes, must be fined a thousand panas; and for 
the life offence with a guarded woman of the servile class, the fine of 
a soldier or a merchant shall be also one thousand.” 

VIII. 384. “For adultery with a woman of the military class, if 
guarded, the fine of a merchant is five hundred; but a soldier, for the 
converse of that offence, must be shaved with urine, or pay the fine 
just mentioned.” 

VIII. 385. “A priest shall pay five hundred panas if he connect himself 
criminally with an unguarded woman of the military, commercial, or 
servile class, and a thousand, for such a connexion with a woman of 
a vile mixed breed.” 

Turning to the system of punishment for offences Manu’s Scheme 
throws an interesting light on the subject. Consider the following 
ordinances: — 

VIII. 379. “Ignominious tonsure is ordained, instead of capital 
punishment, for an adulterer of the priestly class, where the punishment 
of other classes may extend to loss of life.” 

VIII. 380. “Never shall the king slay a Brahman, though convicted 
of all possible crimes; let him banish the offender from his realm, but 
with all his property secure, and his body unhurt.” 

XI. 127. “For killing intentionally a virtuous man of the military 
class, the penance must be a fourth part of that ordained for killing 
a priest; for killing a Vaisya, only an eighth, for killing a Sudra, who 
had been constant in discharging his duties, a sixteenth part.” 

XI. 128. “But, if a Brahmen kill a Kshatriya without malice, he 
must, after a full performance of his religious rites, give the priests 
one bull together with a thousand cows.” 

XI. 129. “Or he may perform for three years the penance for slaying 
a Brahmen, mortifying his organs of sensation and action, letting his 
hair grow long, and living remote from the town, with the root of a 
tree for his mansion.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


31 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 31 

XI. 130. “If he kill without malice a Vaisya, who had a good moral 
character, he may perform the same penance for one year, or give the 
priests a hundred cows and a bull.” 

XI. 131. “For six months must he perform this whole penance, if 
without intention he kill a Sudra; or he may give ten white cows and 
a bull to the priests.” 

VIII. 381. “No greater crime is known on earth than slaying a 
Brahman; and the king, therefore, must not even form in his mind an 
idea of killing a priest.” 

VIII. 126. “Let the king having considered and ascertained the frequency 
of a similar offence, the place and time, the ability of the criminal to 
pay or suffer and the crime itself, cause punishment to fall on those 
alone, who deserves it.” 

VIII. 124. “Manu, son of the Self-existent, has named ten places of 
punishment, which are appropriated to the three lower classes, but a 
Brahman must depart from the realm unhurt in any one of them.” 

VIII. 125. “The part of generation, the belly, the tongue, the two hands, 
and, fifthly, the two feet, the eye, the nose, both ears, the property, and, 
in a capital case, the whole body.” 

How strange is the contrast between Hindu and Non-Hindu criminal 
jurisprudence? How inequality is writ large in Hinduism as seen in its 
criminal jurisprudence? In a penal code charged with the spirit of justice 
we find two things — a section dealing defining the crime and a section 
prescribing a rational form of punishment for breach of it and a rule 
that all offenders are liable to the same penalty. In Manu what do we 
find ? First an irrational system of punishment. The punishment for a 
crime is inflicted on the organ concerned in the crime such as belly, 
tongue, nose, eyes, ears, organs of generation etc., as if the offending 
organ was a sentient being having a will for its own and had not been 
merely a servitor of human being. Second feature of Manu’s penal code 
is the inhuman character of the punishment which has no proportion 
to the gravity of the offence. But the most striking feature of Manu’s 
Penal Code which stands out in all its nackedness is the inequality of 
punishment for the same offence. Inequality designed not merely to punish 
the offender but to protect also the dignity and to maintain the baseness 
of the parties coming to a Court of Law to seek justice in other words 
to maintain the social inequality on which his whole scheme is founded. 

So far I have taken for illustrations such matters as serve to show 
how Manu has ordained social inequality. I now propose to take other 
matters dealt with by Manu in order to illustrate that Manu has also 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


32 


32 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

ordained Religious inequality. These are matters which are connected 
with what are called sacraments and Ashrams. 

The Hindus like the Christians believe in sacraments. The only 
difference is that the Hindus have so many of them that even the 
Roman Catholic Christians would be surprised at the extravagant 
number observed by the Hindus. Originally their number was forty 
and covered the most trivial as well as the most important occasions 
in a person’s life. First they were reduced to twenty. Later on it was 
reduced to sixteen 1 and at that figure the sacraments of the Hindus 
have remained stabilized. 

Before I explain how at the core of these rules of sacraments there 
lies the spirit of inequality the reader must know what the rules are. 
It is impossible to examine all. It will be enough if 1 deal with a few 
of them. I will take only three categories of them, those relating with 
Initiation, Gayatri and Daily Sacrifices. 

First as to Initiation. This initiation is effected by the investitute of 
a person with the sacred thread. The following are the most important 
rules of Manu regarding the sacrament of investitute. 

II. 36. “In the eighth year from the conception of a Brahman, in the 
eleventh from that of a Kshatriya, and in the twelfth from that of a 
Vaisya, let the father invest the child with the mark of his class.” 

II. 37. “Should a Brahman, or his father for him, be desirous of, his 
advancement in sacred knowledge; a Kshatriya, of extending his power; 
or a Vaisya of engaging in mercantile business; the investitute may be 
made in the fifth, sixth, or eighth years respectively.” 

II. 38. “The ceremony of investitute hallowed by the Gayatri must not 
be delayed, in the case of a priest, beyond the sixteenth year; nor in 
that of a soldier, beyond the twenty second; nor in that of a merchant, 
beyond the twenty fourth.” 

II. 39. “After that, all youths of these three classes, who have not 
been invested at the proper time, become vratyas, or outcasts, degraded 
from the Gayatri, and condemned by the virtuous.” 

II. 147. “Let a. man consider that as a mere human birth, which his 
parents gave him for their mutual gratification, and which he receives 
after lying in the womb.” 

II. 148. “But that birth which his principal acharya, who knows the 
whole Veda, procures for him by his divine mother the Gayatri, is a 
true birth; that birth is exempt from age and from death.” 


‘The following are the sixteen sacraments: — 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


33 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 33 

II. 169. “The first birth is from a natural mother; the second, from the 
ligation of the zone; the third from the due performance of the sacrifice; 
such are the births of him who is usually called twice born, according 
to a text of the Veda.” 

II. 170. “Among them his divine birth is that, which is distinguished 
by the ligation of the zone, and sacrificial cord; and in that birth the 
Gayatri is his mother, and the Acharya, his father.” 

Then let me come to Gayatri. It is a Mantra or an invocation of special 
spiritual efficacy. Manu explains what it is. 

II. 76. “Brahma milked out, as it were, from the three Vedas, the 
letter A, the letter U, and the letter M which form by their coalition 
the triliteral monosyllable, together with three mysterious words, bhur, 
bhuvah, swer, or earth, sky, heaven.” 

II. 77, “From the three Vedas, also the Lord of creatures, 
incomprehensibly exalted, successively milked out the three measures 
of that ineffable text, be ginning with the word tad, and entitled Savitri 
or Gayatri.” 

II. 78. “A priest who shall know the Veda, and shall pronounce to 
himself, both morning and evening, that syllable and that holy text 
preceded by the three words, shall attain the sanctity which the Veda 
confers.” 

II. 79. “And a twice born man, who shall a thousand times repeat 
those three (or om, the vyahritis, and the gayatri,) apart from the 
multitude, shall be released in a month even from a great offence, as 
a snake from his slough.” 

II. 80. “The priest, the soldier, and the merchant, who shall neglect 
this mysterious text, and fail to perform in due season his peculiar acts 
of piety, shall meet with contempt among the virtuous.” 

II. 81. “The great immutable words, preceded by the triliteral syllable, 
and followed by the Gayatri which consists of three measures, must be 
considered as the mouth, or principal part of the Veda.” 

II. 82. “Whoever shall repeat, day by day, for three years, without 
negligence, that sacred text, shall hereafter approach the divine essence, 
move as freely as air, and assume an ethereal form.” 

11. 83. “The triliteral monosyllable is an emblem of the Supreme, 
the suppressions of breath with a mind fixed on God are the highest 
devotion; but nothing is more exalted than the gayatri; a declaration of 
truth is more excellent than silence.” 

11. 84. “All rights ordained in the Veda, oblations to fire, and 
solemn sacrifices pass away; but that which passes not away, is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


34 


34 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

declared to be the sylable om, thence called acshare; since it is a 
symbol of God, the Lord of created beings.” 

II. 85. “The act of repeating his Holy Name is ten times better than 
the appointed sacrifice; an hundred times better when it is heard 
by no man; and a thousand times better when it is purely mental.” 

II. 86. “The four domestic sacraments which are accompanied with 
the appointed sacrifice, are not equal, though all be united, to a 
sixteenth part of the sacrifice performed by a repetition of the gayatri.” 

Now to the Daily Sacrifices. 

III. 69. “For the sake of expiating offences committed ignorantly in 
those places mentioned in order, the five great sacrifices were appointed 
by eminent sages to be performed each day by such as keep house.” 

III. 70. “Teaching (and studying) the scripture is the sacrifice to 
the Veda; offering cakes and water, the sacrifice to the Manes, an 
oblation to fire, the sacrifice to the Deities; giving rice or other food 
to living creatures, the sacraments of spirits; receiving guests with 
honour, the sacrifice to men.” 

III. 71. “Whoever omits not those five great sacrifices, if he has 
ability to perform them, is untainted by the sons of the five slaughtering 
places, even though he constantly resides at home.” 

Turning to the Ashramas. The Ashram theory is a peculiar 
feature of the philosophy of Hinduism. It is not known to have 
found a place in the teachings of any other religion. According 
to the Ashram theory life is to be divided into four stages called 
Brahmachari, Grahastha, Vanaprastha and Sannyas. In the 
Brahamachari stage a person is unmarried and devotes his time 
to the study and education. After this stage is over he enters the 
stage of a Grahastha i.e. he marries, rears a family and attends 
to his worldly welfare. Thereafter he enters the third stage and is 
then known as a Vanaprasth a. As a Vanaprastha he dwells in the 
forest as a hermit but without severing his ties with his family or 
without abandoning his rights to his worldly goods. Then comes 
the fourth and the last stage — that of Sannyas — which means 
complete renunciation of the world in search of God. The two stages 
of Brahamchari and Grahastha are natural enough. The two last 
stages are only recommendatory. There is no compulsion about 
them. All that Manu lays down is as follows: 

VI. 1. A twice born who has thus lived according to the law 

in the order of householders, may, taking a firm resolution and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


35 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 35 

keeping his organs in subjection, dwell in the forest, duly (observing 
the rules given below.) 

VI. 2. When a householder sees his (skin) wrinkled, and (his hair) 
white, and the sons of his son, then he may resort to the forest. 

VI. 3. Abandoning all food raised by cultivation, all his belongings,, 
he may depart into the forest, either committing his wife to his 
sons, or a companied by her. 

VI. 33. But having passed the third part of (a man’s natural term 
of) life in the forest, he may live as an ascetic during the fourth part 
of his existence, after abandoning all attachment to worldly objects. 

The inequality embodied in these rules is real although it may hot 
be quite obvious. Observe that all these sacraments and Ashramas are 
confined’ to the twice-born. The Shudras are excluded’ from their benefit. 
Manu of course has no objection to their undergoing the forms of the 
ceremonies. But he objects to their use of the Sacred Mantras in the 
performance of the ceremonies. On this Manu says: — 

X. 127. “Even Shudras, who were anxious to perform their entire 
duty, and knowing what they should perform, imitate the practice of 
good men in the household sacraments, but without any holy text, except 
those containing praise and saluation, are so far from sinning, that they 
acquire just applause.” 

See the following text of Manu for women: — 

II. 66. “The same ceremonies, except that of the sacrificial thread, 
must be duly performed for women at the same age and in the same 
order, that the body may be made perfect; but without any text from 
the Veda.” 

Why does Manu prohibit the Shudras from the benefit of the 
Sacraments ? His interdict against the Shudras becoming a Sannyasi is a 
puzzle. Sannyas means and involves renunciation, abandonment’ of wordly 
object. In legal language Sannyas is interpreted as being equivalent to 
civil death. So that when a man becomes a Sannyasi he is treated as 
being dead from that moment and his heir succeeds immediately. This 
would be the only consequence which would follow if a. Shudra become 
a Sannyasi. Such a consequence could hurt nobody except the Shudra 
himself. Why then this interdict ? The issue is important and I will quote 
Manu to explain the significance and importance of the Sacraments and 
Sannyas. Let us all ponder over the following relevant texts of Manu: 

II. 26. With holy rites, prescribed by the Veda, must the 
ceremony on conception and other sacraments be performed for 


So also are the women. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


36 


36 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

twice-born men, which sanctify the body and purify (from sin) in 
this (life) and after death. 

II. 28. By the study of the Veda, by vows, by burnt oblations, by 
(the recitation of) sacred texts, by the (acquisition of the) three 
sacred Vedas, by offering (to the gods Rishis and Manes), by (the 
procreation of) sons, by the Great Sacrifices, and by (Srauta) rites 
this (human) body is made fit for (union with) Bramha. 

This is the aim and object of the Samscaras. Manu also explains the 
aim and object of Sannyas. 

VI. 81. He (the Sannyasi) who has in this manner gradually given 
up all attachments and is freed from all the pairs (of opposites), 
reposes in Brahman alone. 

VI. 85. A twice born man who becomes an ascetic, after the 
successive performance of the above mentioned acts, shakes off sin 
here below and reaches the highest Brahman. 

From these texts it is clear that according to Manu himself the object 
of the sacraments is to sanctify the body and purify it from sin in this 
life and hereafter and to make it fit for union with God. According to 
Manu the object of Sannyas to reach and repose in God. Yet Manu 
says that the sacraments and Sannyas are the privileges of the higher 
classes. They are not open to-the Shudra. Why? Does not a Shudra need 
sanctification of his body, purification of his soul? Does not a Shudra 
need to have an aspiration to reach God? Manu probably would have 
answered these questions in the affirmative. Why did he then make such 
rules. The answer is that he was a staunch believer in social inequality 
and he knew the danger of admitting religious Equality. If I am equal 
before God why am I not equal on earth? Manu was probably terrified 
by this question. Rather than admit and allow religious equality to affect 
social inequality he preferred to deny religious equality. 

Thus in Hinduism you will find both social inequality and religious 
inequality imbedded in its philosophy. 

To prevent man from purifying himself from sin!! To prevent man from 
getting near to God!! To any rational person such rules must appear 
to be abominal and an indication of a perverse mind. It is a glaring 
instance of how Hinduism is a denial not only of equality but how it is 
denial of the sacred character of human personality. 

This is not all. For Manu does not stop with the non-recognition of 
human personality. He advocates a deliberate debasement of human 
personality. I will take only two instances to illustrate this feature of 
the philosophy of Hinduism. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


37 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 37 

All those who study the Caste System are naturally led to inquire 
into the origin of it. Manu being the progenitor of Caste had to give 
an explanation of the origin of the various castes. What is the origin 
which Manu gives? His explanation is simple. He says that leaving 
aside the four original castes the rest are simply baseborn!! He says 
they are the progeny of fornication and adultery between men and 
women of the four original castes. The immorality and looseness of 
character among men and women of the four original castes must 
have been limitless to account for the rise of innumerable castes 
consisting of innumerable souls!! Manu makes the wild allegation 
without stopping to consider what aspersions he is casting upon men 
and women of the four original castes. For if the chandals — the old 
name for the Untouchables — are the progeny of a Brahman female 
and a Shudra male then it is obvious that to account for such a large 
number of Chandals it must be assumed that every Brahman woman 
was slut and a whore and every Shudra lived an adulterous life with 
complete abandon. Manu in his mad just for debasing the different 
castes by ascribing to them an ignoble origin seems deliberately to 
pervert historical facts. I will give only two illustrations. Take Manu’s 
origin of Magadha and Vaidehik and compare it with the origin of the 
same castes as given by Panini the great Grammarian. Manu says that 
Magadha is a caste which is born from sexual intercourse between 
Vaishya male and Kshatriya female. Manu says that Vaidehik is a 
caste which is born from sexual intercourse between a Vaishya male 
and a Brahmin female. Now turn to Panini. Panini says that Magadha 
means a person who is resident of the country known as Magadha. As 
to Vaidehik Panini says that Vaidehik means a person who is resident 
of the country known as Videha. What a contrast!! How cruel it is. 
Panini lived not later than 300 B.C. Manu lived about 200 A.D. How 
is it that people who bore no stigma in the time of Panini became so 
stained in the hands of Manu? The answer is that Manu was bent on 
debasing them. Why Manu was bent on deliberately debasing people is 
a task which is still awaiting exploration.’ In the meantime we have 
the strange contrast that while Religion everywhere else is engaged 
in the task of raising and ennobling mankind Hinduism is busy in 
debasing and degrading it. 

The other instance I want to use for illustrating the spirit of 
debasement which is inherent in Hinduism pertains to rules regarding 
the naming of a Hindu child. 

1 See my Essay Manu on Caste — A puzzle” {This Essay has not been found in the papers 
received. — Editors.) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


38 


38 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The names among Hindus fall into four classes. They are either 
connected with (i) family deity (ii) the month in which the child is born (Hi) 
with the planets under which a child is born or (iv) are purely temporal 
i.e. connected with business. According to Manu the temporal name of 
a Hindu should consist of two parts and Manu gives directions as to 
what the first and the second part should denote. The second part of a 
Brahmin’s name shall be a word implying happiness; of a Kshatriya’s a 
word implying protection; of a Vaishya’s a term expressive of prosperity 
and of a Shudra’s an expression denoting service. Accordingly the 
Brahmins have Shatma (happiness) or Deva (God), the Kshatriyas have 
Raja (authority) or Verma (armour), the Vaishyas have Gupta (gifts) or 
Datta (Giver) and the Shudras have Das (service) for the second part of 
their names. As to the first part of their names Manu says that in the 
case of a Brahmin it should denote something auspicious, in the case of 
a Kshatriya something connected with power, in the case of a Vaishya 
something connected with wealth. But in the case of a Shudra Manu 
says the first part of his name should denote something contemptible!! 
Those who think that such a philosophy is incredible would like to know 
the exact reference. For their satisfaction I am reproducing the following 
texts from Manu. Regarding the naming ceremony Manu says: — 

II. 30. Let (the father perform or) cause to be performed the 
namadheya (the rite of naming the child), on the tenth or twelfth 
(day after birth), or on a lucky lunar day, in a lucky muhurta, under 
an auspicious constellation. 

II. 31. Let (the first part of) a Brahman’s name (denote) 
something auspicious, a Kshatriya’s name be connected with power, 
and a Vaishya’s with wealth, but a Shudra’s (express something) 
contemptible. 

II. 32. (The second part of) a Brahman’s (name) shall be (a word) 
implying happiness, of a Kshatriya’s (a word) implying protection, 
of a Vaishya’s (a term) expressive of thriving, and of a Shudra’s 
(an expression) denoting service. 

Manu will not tolerate the Shudra to have the comfort of a high 
sounding name. He must be contemptible both in fact and in name. 

Enough has been said to show how Hinduism is a denial of equality 
both social as well as religious and how it is also a degradation of 
human personality. 

Does Hinduism recognize liberty? 

Liberty to be real must be accompanied by certain social conditions. 1 
1 See Laski — Liberty in the Modern State. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


39 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 39 

In the first place there should be social equality. “Privilege tilts the 
balance of social action in favour of its possessors. The more equal 
are the social rights of citizens, the more able they are to utilize their 

freedom If liberty is to move to its appointed end it is important that 

there should be equality.” 

In the second place there must be economic security. “A man may 

be free to enter any vocation he may choose Yet if he is deprived 

of security in employment he becomes a prey of mental and physical 
servitude incompatible with the very essence of liberty... The perpetual 
fear of the morrow, its haunting sense of impending disaster, its fitful 
search for happiness and beauty which perpetually eludes, shows that 
without economic security, liberty is not worth having. Men may well 
be free and yet remain unable to realize the purposes of freedom”. 

In the third place there must be knowledge made available to all. In 
the complex world man lives at his peril and he must find his way in 
it without losing his freedom. 

“There can, under these conditions, be no freedom that is worthwhile 
unless the mind is trained to use its freedom. (Given this fact) the right 
of man to education becomes fundamental to his freedom. Deprive a man 
of knowledge and you will make him inevitably the slave of those more 

fortunate than himself deprivation of knowledge is a denial of the 

power to use liberty for great ends. An ignorant man may be free.... (But) 
he cannot employ his freedom so as to give him assurance of happiness.” 

Which of these conditions does Hinduism satisfy? How Hinduism is 
a denial of equality has already been made clear. It upholds privilege 
and inequality. Thus in Hinduism the very first condition for liberty is 
conspicuous by its absence. 

Regarding economic security three things shine out in Hinduism. In 
the first place Hinduism denies freedom of a vocation. In the Scheme 
of Manu each man has his avocation preordained for him before he is 
born. Hinduism allows no choice. The occupation being preordained it 
has no relation to capacity nor to inclination. 

In the second place Hinduism compels people to serve ends chosen 
by others. Manu tells the Shudra that he is born to serve the higher 
classes. He exhorts him to make that his ideal. Observe the following 
rules laid down by Manu. 

X. 121. If a Shudra (unable to subsist by serving Brahmanas) 
seeks a livelihood, he may serve Kshatriyas, or he may also seek 
to maintain himself by attending on a wealthy Vaishya. 

X. 122. But let a Shudra serve Brahmans 


z:\ambedkar\vol-3\vol3-02.indd MK SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 40 

40 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Manu does not leave the matter of acting upto the ideal to the Shudra. 
He goes a step further and provides that the Shudra does not escape or 
avoid his destined task. For one of the duties enjoined by Manu upon 
the King is to see that all castes including the Shudra to discharge 
their appointed tasks. 

VIII. 410. “The king should order each man of the mercantile class 
to practice trade, or money lending, or agriculture and attendance on 
cattle; and each man of the servile class to act in the service of the 
twice born.” 

VIII. 418. “With vigilant care should the king exert himself in 
compelling merchants and mechanics to perform their respective duties; 
for, when such men swerve from their duty, they throw this world into 
confusion.” 

Failure to maintain was made an offence in the King punishable at 
Law. 

VIII. 335. “Neither a father, nor a preceptor, nor a friend, nor a mother, 
nor a wife, nor a son, nor a domestic priest must be left unpunished 
by the King, if they adhere not with firmness to their duty.” 

VIII. 336. “Where another man of lower birth would be fined one 
pana, the king shall be fined a thousand, and he shall give the fine to 
the priests, or cast it into the river, this is a sacred rule.” 

These rules have a two-fold significance, spiritual as well as economic. 
In the spiritual sense they constitute the gospel of slavery. This may 
not be quite apparent to those who know slavery only by its legal 
outward form and not by reference to its inner meaning. With reference 
to its inner meaning a slave as defined by Plato means a person who 
accepts from another the purposes which control his conduct. In this 
sense a slave is not an end in himself. He is only a means for filling 
the ends desired by others. Thus understood the Shudra is a slave. In 
their economic significance the Rules put an interdict on the economic 
independence of the Shudra. A Shudra, says Manu, must serve. There 
may not be much in that to complain of. The wrong however consists in 
that the. rules require him to serve others. He is not to serve himself, 
which means that he must not strive after economic independence. He 
must forever remain economically dependent on others. 

For as Manu says: — 

I. 91. One occupation only the lord prescribed to the Shudra to 

serve meekly even these other three castes. 


In the third place Hinduism leaves no scope for the Shudra to 
accumulate wealth. Menu’s rules regarding the wages to be paid to the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


41 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 41 

Shudra when employed by the three higher classes are very instructive 
on this point. Dealing with the question of wages to the Shudras, Manu 
says: — 

X. 124. “They must allot to him (Shudra) out of their own family 
property a suitable maintenance, after considering his ability, his industry, 
and the number of those whom he is bound to support.” 

X. 125. “The remnants of their food must be given to him, as well 
as their old clothes, the refuse of their grain, and their old household 
furniture. 

This is Manu’s law of wages. It is not a minimum wage law. It is 
a maximum wage law. It was also an iron law fixed so low that there 
was no fear of the Shudra accumulating wealth and obtaining economic 
security. But Manu did not want to take chances and he went to the 
length of prohibiting the Shudra from accumulating property. He says 
imperatively: — 

X. 129. No collection of wealth must be made by a Shudra even 
though he be able to do it; for a Shudra who has acquired wealth 
gives pain to Brahmans. 

Thus in Hinduism, there is no choice of avocation. There is no economic 
independence and there is no economic security.. Economically, speaking 
of a Shudra is a precarious thing. 

In the matter of the spread of knowledge two conditions are 
prerequisites. There must be formal education. There must be literacy. 
Without these two, knowledge cannot spread. Without formal education 
it is not possible to transmit all the resources and achievements of a 
complex society. Without formal education the accumulated thought 
and experience relating to a subject cannot be made accessible to the 
young and which they will never get if they were left to pick up their 
training in informal association with others. Without formal education 
he will not get new perceptions. His horizon will not be widened and he 
will remain an ignorant slave of his routine work. But formal education 
involves the establishment of special agencies such as schools, books, 
planned materials such as studies etc. How can any one take advantage 
of these special agencies of formal education unless he is literate and 
able to read and write? The spread of the arts of reading and writing 
i.e. literacy and formal education go hand in hand. Without the existence 
of two there can be no spread of knowledge. 

How does Hinduism stand in this matter? 

The conception of formal education in Hinduism is of a very limited 
character. Formal education was confined only to the study of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


42 


42 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Vedas. That was only natural. For the Hindus believed that there was 
no I knowledge outside the Vedas. That being so formal education was 
confined to the study of the Vedas. Another consequence was that the 
Hindu recognized that its only duty was to study in the schools established 
for the study of the Vedas. These schools benefitted only the Brahmins. 
The State did not hold itself responsible for opening establishments for 
the study of arts and sciences which concerned the life of the merchant 
and the artisan. Neglected by the state they had to shift for themselves. 

Each class managed to transmit to its members the ways of doing things 
it was traditionally engaged in doing. The duties of the Vaishya class 
required that a young Vaishya should know the rudiments of commercial 
geography, arithmetic,, some languages as well as the practical details 
of trade. This he learned from his father in the course of the business. 
The Artisan’s class or the Craftsman who sprang out of the ‘Shudra 
class also taught the arts and crafts to their children in the same way. 
Education was domestic. Education was practical. It only increased the 
skill to do a particular thing. It did not lead to new perceptions. It did 
not widen horizon, with the result that the practical education taught 
him only an isolated and uniform way of acting so that in a changing 
environment the skill turned out to be gross ineptitude. Illiteracy became 
an inherent part of Hinduism by a process which is indirect but integral 
to Hinduism. To understand this process it is necessary to draw attention 
to rules framed by Manu in regard to the right to teach and study the 
Vedas. They are dealt with in the following Rules. 

I. 88. To the Brahmanas he (the creator) assigned teaching and 
studying the Veda. 

I. 89. The Kshatriya he (the creator) commanded to study the Veda. 

I. 90. The Vaishya he (the creator) commanded to study the 

Veda. 

II. 116. He who shall acquire knowledge of the Veda without the 
assent of his preceptor, incurs the guilt of stealing the scripture, 
.and shall sink to the region of torment.” 

IV. 99. He (the twice born) must never read (the Veda) in the 

presence of the Shudras. 

IX. 18. Women have no business with the text of the Veda. 

XI. 199. A twice born man who has (improperly) divulged 

the Veda (i.e. to Shudras and women) (commits sin), atones for his 
offence, if he subsists a year on barley. 

In these texts there are embodied three distinct propositions. The 
Brahmin, Kshatriya and Vaishya can study the Vedas. Of these the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


43 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 43 

Brahmins alone have the right to teach the Vedas. But in the case 
of the Shudra he has not only not to study the Vedas but he should 
not be allowed to hear it read. 

The successors of Manu made the disability of the Shudra in the 
matter of the study of the Veda into an offence involving dire penalties. 

For instance Gautama says: — 

XII. 4. If the Shudra intentionally listens for committing to 
memory the Veda, then his ears should be filled with (molten) 
lead and lac; if he utters the Veda, then his tongue should be cut 
off; if he has mastered the Veda his body should be cut to pieces. 

To the same effect is Katyayana. 

The ancient world may be said to have been guilty for failing to take 
the responsibility for the education of the masses. But never has any 
society been guilty of closing to the generality of its people the study 
of the books of its religion. Never has society been guilty of prohibiting 
the mass of its people from acquiring knowledge. Never has society 
made any attempt to declare that any attempt made by the common 
man to acquire knowledge shall be punishable as a crime. Manu is the 
only devine law giver who has denied the common man the right to 
knowledge. 

But I cannot wait to dilate upon this. I am more immediately 
concerned in showing how the prohibition against the study of the Vedas 
to the mass of the people came to give rise to illeteracy and ignorance 
in secular life. The answer is easy. It must be realized that reading 
and writing have an integral connection with the teaching and study 
of the Vedas. Reading and writing were arts necessary for those who 
were free and privileged to study the Vedas. They were not necessary 
to those who were not free to do so. In this way reading and writing 
became incidental to the study of the Vedas. The result was that the 
theory of Manu regarding the rights and prohibitions in the matter of 
the teaching and the study of Vedas came to be extended to the arts of 
reading and writing. Those who had the right to study the Vedas were 
accorded the right to read and write. Those who had no right to study 
the Vedas were deprived of the right to read and write. So that it can 
be rightly said according to the law of Manu reading and writing has 
become the right of the high class few and illeteracy has become the 
destiny of the low class many. 

Only a step in the process of this analysis will show how Manu by 
prohibiting literacy was responsible for the general ignorance in which 
the masses came to be enveloped. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


44 


44 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Thus Hinduism far from encouraging spread of knowledge is a 
gospel of darkness. 

Taking these facts into consideration Hinduism is opposed to the 
conditions in which liberty can thrive. It is therefore denial of liberty. 

Ill 

Does Hinduism recognize Fraternity? 

There are two forces prevalent in Society. Individualism and 
Fraternity. Individualism is ever present. Every individual is ever 
asking “I and my neighbours, are we all brothers, are we even fiftieth 
cousins, am I their keeper, why should I do right to them” and under 
the pressure of his own particular interests acting as though he was 
an end to himself, thereby developing a non-social and even an anti- 
social self. Fraternity is a force of opposite character. Fraternity is 
another name for fellow feeling. It consists in a sentiment which leads 
an individual to identify himself with the good of others whereby “the 
good of others becomes to him a thing naturally and necessarily to be 
attended to like any of the physical conditions of our existence”. It is 
because of this sentiment of fraternity that the individual does not 
“bring himself to think of the rest of his fellow-creatures as struggling 
rivals with him for the means of happiness, whom he must desire 
to see defeated in their object in order that he may succeed in his 
own.” Individualism would produce anarchy. It is only fraternity which 
prevents it and helps to sustain the moral order among men. Of this 
there can be no doubt. 

How does this sentiment of Fraternity of fellow feeling arise? 
J. S. Mill says that this sentiment is a natural sentiment. 

“The social state is at once so natural, so necessary, and so 
habitual to man, that, except in some unusual cicumstances or 
by an effort of voluntary abstraction he never conceives himself 
otherwise than as a member of a body; and this association is riveted 
more and more, as mankind are further removed from the state of 
savage independence. Any condition, therefore, which is essential 
to a state of society, becomes more and more an inseparable part 
of every person’s conception of the state of things which he is born 
into, and which is the destiny of a human being. Now, society 
between human beings, except in the relation of master and slave, 
is manifestly impossible on any other footing than that the interests 
of all are to be consulted. Society between equals can only exist 
on the understanding that the interests of all are to be regarded 
equally. And since in all states of civilisation, every person, except 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


45 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 45 

an absolute monarch, has equals, every one is obliged to live on these 
terms with some body; and in every age some advance is made towards 
a state in which it will be impossible to live permanently on other 
terms with any body. In this way people grow up unable to conceive as 
possible to them a state of total disregard of other people’s interests.” 

Does this sentiment of fellow feeling find a place among the Hindus? 
The following facts throw a flood of light on this question. 

The first fact that strikes one is the number of castes. No body 
has made an exact computation of their number. But it is estimated 
that total is not less than 2000. It might be 3000. This is not the 
only distressing aspect of this fact. There are others. Castes are 
divided into sub-castes. Their number is legion. The total population 
of the Brahmin Caste is about a crore and a half. But there are 1886 
sub-castes of the Brahmin Caste. In the Punjab alone the Saraswat 
Brahmins of the Province of Punjab are divided into 469 sub-castes. 
The Kayasthas of Punjab are divided into 590 sub-castes. One could 
go on giving figures to show this infinite process of splitting social life 
into small fragments. 

The third aspect of this splitting process is the infinitely small 
fragments into which the Castes are split. Some of the Baniya sub- 
castes can count no more than 100 families. They are so inter related 
they find extremely dificult to marry within their castes without 
transgressing the rules of consanguinity. 

It is noteworthy what small excuses suffice to bring about this 
splitting. 

Equally noteworthy is the hierarchical character of the Caste System. 
Castes form an hierarchy in which one caste is at the top and is the 
highest, another at the bottom and it is the lowest and in between there 
are castes every one of which is at once above some castes and below 
some castes. The caste system is a system of gradation in which every 
caste except the highest and the lowest has a priority and precedence 
over some other castes. 

How is this precedence or this superiority determined ? This order 
of superiority and inferiority or this insubordination is determined by 
Rules (1) which are connected with religious rites and (2) which are 
connected with commensuality. 

Religion as a basis of Rules of precedence manifests itself in 
three ways. Firstly through religious ceremonies, secondly through 
incantations that accompany the religious ceremonies and thirdly 
through the position of the priest. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


46 


46 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Beginning with the ceremonies as a source of rules of precedence it 
should be noted that the Hindu Scriptures prescribe sixteen religious 
ceremonies. Although those are Hindu ceremonies every Hindu Caste 
cannot by right claim to perform all the sixteen ceremonies. Few can 
claim the right to perform all. Some are allowed to perform certain 
ceremonies, some are not allowed to perform certain of the ceremonies. 
For instance take the ceremony of Upanayan, wearing of the sacred 
thread. Some castes can’t. Precedence follows this distinction in the 
matter of right to perform the ceremonies. A caste which can claim to 
perform all the ceremonies is higher in status than the caste which has 
a right to perform a few. 

Turning to the Mantras, it is another source for rules of precedence 
According to the Hindu Religion the same ceremony can be performed 
in two different ways. (1) Vedokta and (2) Puranokta. In the Vedokta 
form the ceremonies are performed with Mantras (incantations) from the 
Vedas. In the Puranokta form the ceremony is performed with Mantras 
(incantations) from the Puranas. Hindu Religious Scriptures fall into two 
distinct categories (1) The Vedas which are four, and (2)the Puranas 
which are eighteen. Although they are all respected as scriptures they 
do not all have the same sanctity. The Vedas have the highest sanctity 
and the Puranas have the lowest sanctity. The way the Mantras give rise 
to social precedence will be obvious if it is borne in mind that not every 
caste is entitled to have the ceremony performed in the Vedokta form. 
Three castes may well claim the right to the performance of one of the 
sixteen ceremonies. But it will be that one of it is entitled to perform it 
in the Vedokta form, another in the Puranokta form. Precedence goes 
with the kind of Mantra that a caste is entitled to use in the performance 
of a religious ceremony. A caste which is entitled to use Vedic Mantras 
is superior to a caste which is entitled to use only Puranokta Mantras. 

Taking the priest as a second source of precedence connected with 
Religion, Hinduism requires the instrumentality of a priest for the 
derivation of the full benefit from the performance of a religious 
ceremony. The priest appointed by the scripture is the Brahmin. A 
Brahmin therefore is indispensable. But the scriptures do not require 
that a Brahmin shall acecept the invitation of any and every Hindu 
irrespective of his caste to officiate at a religious ceremony. The 
invitation of which caste he will accept and of which he will refuse is a 
matter left to the wishes of the Brahmin. By long and well established 
custom it is now settled at which caste he will officiate and at which 
caste he will not. This fact has become the basis of precedence as 
between castes. The caste at which a Brahmin will officiate is held as 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


47 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 47 

superior to a caste at whose religious functions a Brahmin will not 
officiate. 

The second source for rules of precedence is commensality. It will be 
noticed that rules of marriage have not given rise to rules of precedence 
as rules of commensality have. The reason lies in the distinction between 
the rules prohibiting intermarriage and interdining. That difference is 
obvious. The prohibition on intermarriage is such that it cannot only be 
respected but it can be carried out quite strictly. But the prohibition of 
interdining creates difficulties. It cannot be carried out quite strictly in 
all places and under all circumstances. Man migrates and must migrate 
from place to place. In every place he happens to go he may not find 
his castemen. He may find himself landed in the midst of strangers. 
Marriage is not a matter of urgency but food is. He can wait for getting 
himself married till he returns to the Society of his castemen. But he 
cannot wait for his food. He must find it from somewhere and from 
someone. Question arises from which caste he can take food, if he has 
to. The rule is that he will take food from a caste above him but will not 
take food from a caste which is below him. There is no way of finding 
how it came to be decided that a Hindu can take food from one caste 
and not from another. By long series of precedent every Hindu knows 
from what caste he can take food and from what caste he cannot. This 
is determined chiefly by the rule followed by the Brahmin. A caste is 
higher or lower according as the Brahmin takes from it food or not. In 
this connection the Brahmin has a very elaborate set of rules in the 
matter of food and water. (1) He will take only water from some and not 
from others. (2) A brahmin will not take food cooked in water by any 
caste. (3) He will take only food cooked in oil from some castes. Again he 
has a set of rules in the matter of the vessels, in which he will accept 
food and water. He will take food or water in an earthen vessel from 
some castes, only in metallic vessel from some and only in glass vessel 
from others. This goes to determine the level of the castes. If he takes 
food cooked in oil from a caste its status is higher than the caste from 
which he will not. If he takes water from a caste its status is higher 
than the caste from which he will not. If he takes water in a metallic 
vessel that caste is higher than the caste from which he will take water 
in an earthen vessel. Both these castes are higher than the caste from 
which he will take water in a glass vessel. Glass is a substance which 
is called (Nirlep) (which conserves no stain) therefore a Brahmin can 
take water in it even from the lowest. But other metals do conserve 
stains. Contaminating character of the stain depends upon the status 
of the person who has used it. That status depends upon the Brahmins 
will to accept water in that vessel. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


48 


48 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

These are some of the factors which determine the place and status 
of a caste in this Hindu hierachical system of castes. 

This hierarchial organization of the caste system is responsible for 
producing a social psychology which is noteworthy. In the first place it 
produces a spirit of rivalry among the different castes for dignity. Secondly 
it produces an ascending scale of hatred and descending scale of contempt. 

This social psychology of mutual hatred and contempt is well illustrated 
by the innumerable proverbs that are flying about in India. As examples 
I record a few of them. 

This spirit of hatred and contempt has not only found its place in 
proverbs but it has found its place in Hindu literature also. I refer to a 
Scripture known as the Sahyadrikhand. It is one of the Puranas which 
form a part of the Hindu Sacred literature. But its subject matter is 
totally foreign to the subject matter of other Puranas. It deals with the 
origin of the different castes. In doing so it assigns noble origin to other 
castes while it assigns to the Brahmin caste the filthiest origin. It was 
a revenge on Manu. It was worst lampoon on the Brahmins as a caste. 
The Peshwas very naturally ordered its destruction. Some survived the 
general destruction. 

I will just record one more fact before I put the question. 

Present day Hindus are probably the strongest opponents of Marxism. 
They are horrified at its doctrine of class-struggle. But they forget that 
India has been not merely the land of class struggle but she has been 
the land of class wars. 

The bitterest class war took place between the Brahmins and the 
Kshatriyas. The classical literature of the Hindus abounds in reference 
to class wars between these two Varnas. 

The first recorded conflict was between the Brahmins and KingVena. 
Vena was the son of King Anga, of the race of Atri and was born of 
Sunitha, the daughter of Mrityu (Death). This son of the daughter of 
Kala (death), owing to the taint derived from his maternal grandfather, 
threw his duties behind his back, and lived in covetousness under the 
influence of desire. This king established an irreligious system of conduct; 
transgressing the ordinances of the Veda, he was devoted to lawlessness. 
In his reign men lived without study of the sacred books and the gods had 
no soma-libations to drink at sacrifices. T he declared, ‘am the object, and 
the performer of sacrifice, and the sacrifice itself; it is to me that sacrifice 
should be presented, and oblation offered This transgressor of the rules of 
duty, who arrogated to himself what was not his due, was then addressed 
by all the great rishis, headed by Marichi. ‘We are about to consecrate 

* The proverbs are not mentioned in the MS — Editors. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


49 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 49 

ourselves for a ceremony which shall last for many years, practice 
not unrightousness, O Vena: this is not the eternal rule of duty. 
Thou art in every deed a Prajapati of Atri’s race, and thou hast 
engaged to protect thy subjects.’ The foolish Vena, ignorant of 
what was right, laughingly answered those great rishis who had so 
addressed him; ‘Who but myself is the ordainer of duty or whom 
ought I to obey? Who on earth equals me in sacred knowledge, 
in prowess, in austere fervour, in truth? Ye who are deluded and 
senseless know not that I am the source of all beings and duties. 
Hesitate not to believe that I, if I willed, could burn up the earth, 
or deluge it with water, or close up heaven and earth.’ When wing 
to his delusion and arrogance Vena could not be governed then the 
mighty rishis becoming incensed, seized the vigorous and struggling 
king, and nibbed his left thigh. From this thigh, so rubbed, was 
produced a black man, very short in stature, who, being alarmed, 
stood with joined hands. Seeing that he was agitated, Atri said to 
him ‘Sit down’ (Nishada). He became the founder of the race of 
the Nishadas, and also progenitor of the hivaras (fishermen), who 
sprang from the corruption of Vena. So two were produced from 
him the other inhabitants of the Vindhya range, the Tukharas and 
Tumburas, who are prone to lawlessness. Then the mighty sages, 
excited and incensed, again rubbed the right hand of Vena, as men 
do the Arani wood, and from it arose Pritha, respondent in body, 
glowing like the manifested Agni.” 

“The son of Vena (Pritha) then, with joined hands, addressed the 
great Rishis: ‘A very slender understanding for perceiving the principles 
of duty has been given to me by nature; tell me truly how I must 
employ it. Doubt not that I shall perform whatever thy shall declare 
to me as my duty, and its object’. Then those gods and great rishis 
said to him: ‘Whatever duty is enjoined perform it without hesitation, 
disregarding what though mayest like or dislike, looking on all creatures 
with an equal eye, putting far from thee lust, anger, cupidity and pride. 
Restrain by the strength of thine arm all those men who swerve from 
righteousness, having a constant regard to duty. And in thought, act, 
and word take upon thyself, and continually renew, the engagement to 

protect the terrestrial Brahman (Veda or Brahmins?) And promise 

that thou wilt exempt the Brahmans from punishment, and preserve 
society from the confusion of Castes’. The son of Vena then replied 
to the gods, headed by the rishis: ‘The great Brahmans, the chief of 
men, shall be reverenced by me’. ‘So be it,’ rejoined those declares 
of the Veda. Sukra, the depository of divine knowledge, became his 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


50 


50 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Purohita; the Balakhilyas and Sarasvatyas his ministers; and 
the venerable Garga, the great rishi, his astrologer. 

The second recorded conflict took place between the Brahmins 
and the Kshatriya king Pururavas. A brief reference to it occurs 
in the Adiparva of the Mahabharat. 

Pururavas was born of Ha. Ruling over thirteen islands of 
the ocean, and surrounded by beings who were all superhuman, 
himself a man of great renown, Pururavas, intoxicated by his 
prowess engaged in a conflict with the Brahmans, and robbed them 
of their jewels, although they loudly remonstrated. Sanatkumara 
came from Brahma’s heaven, and addressed to him an admonition, 
which however, he did not regard. Being then straightway cursed 
by the in censed rishis, he perished, this covetous monarch, 
who, through pride of power, had lost his understanding. This 
glorious being (virat), accompanied Urvasi, brought down for the 
performance of sacred rites the fires which existed in the heaven 
of the Gandharvas, properly distributed into three. 

A third collision is reported to have occurred between the 
Brahmins and King Nahusha. The story is given in great details 
in the Udyogaparva of the Mahabharat. It is there recorded: 

“After his slaughter of the demon Vrittra, Indra became alarmed 
at the idea of having taken the life of a Brahmin (for Vrittra was 
regarded as such), and hid himself in waters. In consequence of 
the disappearance of the king of gods, all affairs, celestial as well 
as terrestrial, fell into confusion. The rishis and Gods then applied 
to Nahusha to be their king. After at first excusing himself on 
the plea of want of power, Nahusha at length, in compliance with 
their solicitations, accepted the high function. Up to the period 
of his elevation he had led a virtuous life, but he now became 
addicted to amusement and sensual pleasure; and even aspired to 
the possession of Indrani, Indra’s wife, whom he had happened to 
see. The queen resorted to the Angiras Vrihaspati, the preceptor 
of the Gods, who engaged to protect her. Nahusha was greatly 
incensed on hearing of this interference; hut the Gods endeavoured 
to pacify him, and pointed out the immorality of appropriating 
another person’s wife. Nahusha, however, would listen to no 
remonstrance, and insisted that in his adulterous designs he was 
not worse than Indra himself; “The renowned Ahalya, a rish’s 
wife, was formerly corrupted by Indra in her husband’s lifetime; 
why was he not prevented by you? And many barbarous acts, 
and unrighteous deeds, and frauds were perpetrated of by old 
Indra; Why was he not prevented by you?” The Gods, urged by 
Nahusha, then went to bring Indrani; but Vrihaspati would not 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


51 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 51 

give her up. At his recommendation, however, she solicited 
Nahusha for some delay, till she should ascertain what had 
become of her husband. This request was granted. The Gods 
next applied to Vishnu on behalf of Indra; and Vishnu promised 
that if Indra would sacrifice to him, he should be purged from 
his guilt, and recover his dominion, while Nahusha would be 
destroyed. Indra sacrificed accordingly; and the result is thus told; 
“Having divided the guilt of Brahmanicide among trees, rivers, 
mountains, the earth, women and the elements, Vasava (Indra), 
lord of the Gods, became freed from suffering and sin, and self 
governed.” Nahusha was by this means, shaken from his place. 

But he must have speedily regained his position, as we are told 
that Indra was again ruined, and became invisible. Indrani now 
went in search of her husband; and by the help of Upasriti (the 
Goddess of night and revealer of secrets) discovered him existing 
in a very subtle form in the stem of a lotus growing in a lake 
situated in a continent within an ocean north of the Himalaya. 

She made known to him the wicked intention of Nahusha, and 
entreated him to exert his power, rescue her from danger, and 
resume his dominion. Indra declined any immediate interposition 
on the plea of Nahusha’s superior strength; but suggested to 
his wife a device by which the usurper might be hurled from 
his position. She was recommended to say to Nahusha that “if 
he would visit her on a celestial vehicle borne by rishis, she 
would with pleasure submit hereself to him”. The question 
of the Gods accordingly went to Nahusha, by whom she was 
graciously received, and made this proposal: “I desire for thee, 
king of the Gods, a vehicle hitherto unknown, such as neither 
Vishnu, nor Rudra, nor the asuras, nor the rakshases employ. 

Let the eminent rishis, all united, bear thee, lord, in a car; this 
idea pleases me”. Nahusha receives favourably this appeal to his 
vanity, and in the course of his reply thus gives utterance to 
his self congratulation: “He is a personage of no mean prowess 
who makes the Munis his bearers. I am a fervid devotee of great 
might, lord of the past, the future and the present. If I were 
angry the world would no longer stand; on me everything depends 

Wherefore, O Goddess I shall, without doubt, carry out 

what you propose. The seven rishis, and all the Brahman rishis. 
shall carry me. Behold beautiful Goddess, my majesty and my 
prosperity.” The narrative goes on: “Accordingly this wicked 
being, irreligious, violent, intoxicated by the force of conceit, 
and arbitrary in his conduct, attached to his car the rishis, who 
submitted to his commands, and compelled them to bear him”. 
Indrani then again resorts to Vrihaspati, who assures her that 
vengeance will soon overtake Nahusha for his presumption; and 
promises that he will himself perform a sacrifice with a view to the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


52 


52 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

destruction of the oppressor, and the discovery of Indra’s lurking 
place. Agni is then sent to discover and bring Indra to Vrihaspati; 
and the latter, on Indra’s arrival, informs him of all that had 
occurred during his absence. While Indra with Kuvera, Yama, 
Soma, and Varuna, was devising means for the destruction of 
Nahusha, the sage Agastya came up, congratulated Indra on the 
fall of his rival, and proceeded to relate how it had occurred: 
“Wearied with carrying the sinner Nahusha, the eminent divine 
rishis, and the spotless brahman-rishis asked that divine personage 
Nahusha (to solve) a difficulty: ‘Dost thou, Vasava, most excellent 
of conquerors, regard as authoritative or not those Brahmana 
texts which are recited at the immolation of king?’ ‘No’, replied 
Nahusha, whose understanding was enveloped in darkness. The 
rishis rejoined: ‘Engaged in unrighteousness, thou attainest not 
unto righteousness: these texts, which were formerly uttered by 
great rishis, are regarded by us as authoritative.’ The (proceeds 
Agastya) disputing with the munis, impelled by unrighteousness, 
touched me on the head with his foot. In consequence of this the 
king’s glory was smitten and his prosperity departed. When he 
had instantly become agitated and oppressed with fear, I said 
to him, ‘Since thou, O fool, condemnest that sacred text, always 
held in honour, which has been composed by former sages, and 
employed by Brahman-rishis, and hast touched my head with thy 
foot, and employest the Brahma — like and irresistable rishis as 
bearers to carry thee, — therefore, short of thy lustre and all thy 
merit exhausted, sink down, sinner, degraded from heaven to 
earth. For then thousand years thou shalt crawl in the form of 
a huge serpent. When that period is completed, thou shalt again 
ascend to heaven. ‘So fell that wicked wretch from the sovereignty 
of the Gods.” 

Next there is a reference to the conflict between King Nimi and the 
Brahmins. The Vishnu Puran relates the story as follows: — 

“Nimi had requested the Brahman-rishi Vasishtha to officiate 
at a sacrifice, which was to last a thousand years, Vasishtha in 
reply pleaded a pre-engagement to Indra for five hundred years, 
but promised to return at the end of that period. The king made no 
remark, and Vasishtha went away, supposing that he had assented 
to this arrangement. On his return, however, the priest discovered 
that Nimi had retained Gautama (who was equal with Vasishtha 
a Brahman-rishi) and others to perform the sacrifices; and being 
incensed at the neglect to give him notice of what was intended, he 
cursed the king, who was then asleep, to lose his corporeal form. 
When Nimi awoke and learnt that he had been cursed without 
any previous warning, he retorted, by uttering a similar curse on 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


53 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 53 

Vasishtha, and then died. In consequence of this curse the vigour 
of Vasistha, however, received from them another body when their 
seed had fallen from them at the sight of Urvasi. Nimi’s body was 
emblamed. At the close of the sacrifice which he had begun, the 
Gods were willing, on the intercession of the priests, to restore him 
to life, but he declined the offer, and was placed by the deities, 
according to his desire, in the eyes of all living creatures. It is in 
consequence of this fact that they are always opening the shutting, 
(nimishas means “the twinkling of the eye”).” 

Manu mentions another conflict between the Brahmins and King 
Sumukha. But of this no details are available. 

These are instances of conflict between the Brahmins and the Kshatriya 
Kings. From this it must not be supposed that the Brahmins and 
the Kshatriyas as two classes did not clash. That there were clashes 
between these two classes as distinguished from conflicts with kings is 
abundently proved by material the historic value of which cannot be 
doubted. Reference may be made to three events. 

First is the contest between two individuals Vishvamitra the Kshatriya 
and Vasishtha the Brahmin. The issue between the two was whether a 
Kshatriya can claim Brahmahood. The story is told in Ramayana and 
is as follows:- 

“There was formerly, we are told, a king called Kusa, son of 
Prajapati, who had a son called Kushanabha, who was father of 
Gadhi, the father of Visvamitra. The latter ruled the earth for many 
thousand years. On one occasion, when he was making a circuit of 
the earth, he came to Vasishtha’s hermitage, the pleasant abode 
of many saints, sages, and holy devotees, where, after at first 
declining he allowed himself to be hospitably entertained with his 
followers. Visvamitra, however, coveting the wondrous cow, which 
had supplied all the dainties of the feast, first of all asked that 
she should be given to him in exchange for a hundred thousand 
common cows, adding that “she was a gem, that gems were the 
property of the king, and that, therefore, the cow was his by right”. 

On this price being refused the king advances immensely in his 
offers, but all without effect. He then proceeds — very ungratefully 
and tyrannically, it must be allowed — to have the cow removed 
by force, but she breaks away from his attendants, and rushes 
back to her master, complaining that he was deserting her. He 
replied that he was not deserting her, but that the king was 
much more powerful than he. She answers, “Men do not ascribe 
strength to a Kshatriya; the Brahmins are stronger. The Strength 
of Brahmins is divine, and superior to that of Kshatriya. Thy 
strength is immeasureable. Visvamitra, though of great vigour, is not 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


54 


54 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

more powerful than thou. Thy energy is invincible. Commission 
me, who have been acquired by the Brahmanical power, and I will 
destroy the pride, and force, and attempt of this wicked prince”. 
She accordingly by her bellowing creates hundreds of Pahlavas, 
who destroy the entire host of Visvamitra, but are slain by him 
in their turn. Sakas and Yavans, of great power and valour, and 
well armed, were then produced, who consumed the king’s soldiers, 
but were routed by him. The cow then calls into existence by her 
bellowing, and from different parts of her body, other warriors 
of various tribes, who again destroyed Visvamitra’s entire army, 
foot soldiers, elephants, horses, chariots, and all. “A hundred of 
the monarch’s sons, armed with various weapons, then rushed 
in great fury on Vashistha, but were all reduced to ashes in a 
moment by the blast of that sage’s mouth. Vishvamitra, being 
thus utterly vanquished and humbled, appointed one of his sons 
to be regent, and travelled to the Himalaya, where he betook 
himself to austerities, and thereby obtained a vision of Mahadeva, 
who at his desire revealed to him the science of arms in all its 
branches, and gave him celestial weapons with which, elated 
and full of pride, he consumed the hermitage of Vashishtha, 
and put its inhabitants to flight. Vashishtha then threatens 
Vishvamitra and uplifts his Brahminical mace. Vishvamitra too, 
raises his fiery weapon and calls out to his adversary to stand. 
Vashishtha bids him to show his strength, and boasts that he 
will soon humble his pride. He asks: “What comparison is there 
between a Kshatriya’s might, and the great might of a Brahman? 
Behold, thou contemptible Kshatriya, my divine Brahmanical 
power”. The dreadful fiery weapon uplifted by the son of Gadhi 
was then quenched by the rod of the Brahman, as fire is by 
water. Many and various other celestial missiles, as the nooses 
of Brahma, Kala (time), and Varuna, the discus of Vishnu, and 
the trident Siva, were hurled by Vishvamitra at his antagonist, 
but the son of Brahma swallowed them up in his all-devouring 
mace. Finally, to the intense consternation of all the Gods, the 
warrior shot off the terrific weapon of Brahma (Brahmastra); 
but this was equally ineffectual against the Brahmanical sage. 
Vashishtha had now assumed a direful appearance:’ Jets of 
fire mingled with smoke darted from the pores of his body; 
the Brahminical mace blazed in his hand like a smokeless 
mundane conflagration, or a second sceptre of Yama”. Being 
appeased, however, by the munis, who proclaimed his superiority 
to his rival, the sage stayed his vengeance ;and Vishvamitra 
exclaimed with a groan: ‘Shame on a Kshatriya’s strength; the 
strength of a Brahman’s might alone is strength; by the single 
Brahmanical mace all my weapons have been destroyed.’ No 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


55 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 55 

alternative now remains, to the humiliated monarch, but either 
to acquiesce in this helpless inferiority, or to work out his own 
elevation to the Brahmanical order. He embraces the latter 
alternative: “Having pondered well this defeat, I shall be take 
myself, with composed senses and mind, to strenous austere 
fervour, which shall exalt me to the rank of a Brahman”. Intensely 
vexed and mortified, groaning and full of hatred against his 
enemy, he travelled with his queen to the south, and carried his 
resolution into effect; and we are first of all told that three sons 
Havishyanda, Madhusyanda, and Dridhanetra were born to him. 

At the end of a thousand years Brahma appeared, and announced 
that he had conquered the heaven of royal sages (Rajarshis); 
and, in consequence of his austere fervour, he was recognised as 
having attained that rank. Vishvamitra, however, was ashamed, 
grieved, and incensed at the offer of so very inadequate a reward, 
and exclaimed: “I have practised intense austerity, and the Gods 
and Rishis regard me only as a Rajarshi and not as a Brahman.” 
There is conflict recorded between the same persons or different 
persons of the same name though on a somewhat different issue. 

King Trisanku, one of Ikshvaku’s descendants, had conceived 
the design of celebrating a sacrifice by virtue of which he should 
ascent bodily to heaven. As Vashistha, on being summoned, 
declared that the thing was impossible (asakyam), Trisanku 
travelled to the south, where the sage’s hundred sons were 
engaged in austerities, and applied to them to do what their 
father had declined. Though he addressed them with the greatest 
reverence and humility, and added that “the Ikshvaku regarded 
their family — priests as their highest resource in difficulties, and 
that, after their father, he himself looked to them as his tutelary 
deities” he received from the haughty priests the following rebuke 
for his presumption: “Asakyam” “Fool, thou hast been refused 
by thy truth speaking preceptor. How is it that, disregarding 
his authority, thou hast resorted to another school (sakha). The 
family priest is the highest oracle of all the Ikshvakus; and the 
command of that veracious personages cannot be transgressed. 
Vashishtha, the divine Rishi, has declared that’ the thing cannot 
be’; and how can we undertake thy sacrifice? Thou art foolish 
king; return to thy capital. The divine (Vashishtha) is competent 
to act as priest of the three worlds; how can we shew him 
disrespect?” Trisanku then gave them to understand, that as 
his preceptor and “his preceptor’s sons had declined compliance 
with his requests, he should think of some other expedient”. 

In consequence of his venturning to express this presumptuous 
intention, they condemned him by their imprecation to become 
a Chandala. As this curse soon took effect, and the unhappy 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


56 


56 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

king’s form was changed into that of a degraded outcast, he 
resorted to Vishvamitra (who, as we have seen, was also dwelling 
at this period in the south), enlarging on his own virtues and 
piety, and bewailing his fate. Vishvamitra commiserated his 
condition, and promised to sacrifice on his behalf, and exalt 
him to heaven in the same Chandala form to which he had 
been condemned by his preceptor’s curse. “Heaven is now as 
good as in thy possession, since thou hast resorted to the son 
of Kusika”. He then directed that preparations should be made 
for the sacrifice, and that all the Rishis, including the family of 
Vashishtha should he invited to the ceremony. The disciples of 
Vishvamitra, who had conveyed his message, reported the result 
on their return in these words: “Having heard your message, 
all the Brahmans are assembling in all the countries, and have 
arrived, excepting Mahodaya (Vashishtha)? Hear what dreadful 
words those hundred Vashishthas, their voices quivering with 
rage, have uttered: “How can the Gods and Rishis consume the 
oblation at the sacrifice of that man, especially if he be a Chandala, 
for whom a Kshatriya is officiating priest? How can illustrious 
Brahmans ascend to heaven after eating the food of a Chandala, 
and being entertained by Vishvamitra?” These ruthless words all 
Vashishthas, together with Mahodaya, uttered, their eyes inflamed 
with anger. Vishvamitra, who was greatly incensed on receiving 
this, message by a curse doomed the sons of Vashishtha to be 
reduced to ashes, and reborn as degraded outcasts (mritapah) 
for seven hundred births, and Mahodaya to become a Nishada. 
Knowing that this curse had taken effect, Vishvamitra then 
after eulogizing Trisanku, proposed to the assembled Rishis 
that the sacrifice should be celebrated. To this they assented, 
being actuated by fear of the terrible sage’s wrath. Vishvamitra 
himself officiated at the sacrifices as yajakas; and the other 
Rishis as priests (Ritvijah) (with other functions) performed all 
the ceremonies. Vishvamitra next invited the gods to partake of 
the oblations; “When, however, the deities did not come to receive 
their portions, Vishvamitra became full of wrath, and raising aloft 
the sacrificial ladle, thus addressed Trisanku: ‘Behold, O monarch, 
the power of austere fervour acquired by my own efforts. I myself, 
by my own energy, will conduct thee to heaven. Ascend to that 
celestial region which is so arduous to attain in an earthly body. 
I have surely earned SOME reward of my austerity’.” Trisanku 
ascended instantly to heaven in the sight of Munis. Indra, however, 
ordered him to be gone, as a person who, having incurred the 
curse of his spiritual preceptors, was unfit for the abode of the 
celestials: — and to fall down headlong to earth. He accordingly 
began to descend, invoking loudly, as he fell, the help of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


57 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 57 

his spiritual patron. Vishvamitra, greatly incensed, called out 
to him to stop: “Then by the power of his divine knowledge and 
austere fervour created, like another Prajapati, other Seven Rishis 
(a constellation so called) in the southern part of the sky. Having 
proceeded to this quarter of the heavens, the renowned sage, in 
the midst of the Rishis, formed another garland of stars, being 
overcome with fury. Exclaiming, ‘I will create another Indra, or 
the world shall have no Indra at all’, he began, in his rage, to call 
Gods also into being”. The Rishis, Gods, (Suras), and Asuras now 
became seriously alarmed and said to Vishvamitra, in a concilliatory 
tone, that Trisanku, “as he had been cursed by his preceptors, 
should not be admitted bodily into heaven, until he had undergone 
some lustration”. The sage replied that he had given a promise 
to Trisanku, and appealed to the Gods to permit his proteage to 
remain bodily in heaven, and the newly created stars to retain their 
places in perpetuity. The Gods agreed that “these numerous stars 
should remain, but beyond the Sun’s path, and that Trisanku, like 
an immortal, with his head downwards should shine among them, 
and be followed by them”, adding “that his object would be thus 
attained, and his renown secured, and he would be like a dweller 
in heaven”. Thus was this great dispute adjusted by a compromise, 
which Vishvamitra accepted . 1 

When all the Gods and rishis had departed at the conclusion of 
the sacrifice, Vishvamitra said to his attendant devotees; “This has 
been a great interruption (to our austerities) which has occurred 
in the southern region: we must proceed in another direction 
to continue our penances”. He accordingly went to a forest in 
the west, and began his austerities anew. Here the narrative 
is again interrupted by the introduction of another story, that 
of king Ambarisha, king of Ayodhya, who was, according to the 
Ramayana, the twenty eighth in descent from Ikshvaku, and 
the twenty second from Trisanku. Vishvamitra is nevertheless 
represented as flourishing contemporaneously with both of 
these princes. The story relates that Ambarisha was engaged in 
performing a sacrifice, when Indra carried away the victim. The 
priest said that this ill-omened event had occurred owing to the 
king’s bad administration; and would call for a great expiation, 
unless a human victim could be produced. After a long search the 
royal rishi (Ambarisha) came upon the Brahmin-rishi Richika, a 
descendant of Bhrigu, and asked him to sell one of his sons for a 
victim, at the price of a hundred thousand cows. Richika answered 
that he would not sell his eldest son; and his wife added that 

1 This is the story of Trisanku. It will have been observed, it differs materially from the 
one quoted above from Harivansa; but brings out more distinctly the character of the 
conflict between Vashishtha and Vishvamitra. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


58 


58 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

she would not sell the youngest: “Eldest sons,” she observed, 
“being generally the favourites of their fathers, and youngest sons 
of their mothers”. The second son, Sunassepa then said that in 
that case he regarded himself as the one who was to be sold, and 
desired the king to remove him. The hundred thousand cows, with 
ten millions of gold pieces and heaps of jewels, were paid down, 
and Sunassepa was carried away. As they were passing through 
Puskara, Sunassepa beheld his maternal uncle Vishvamitra who 
was engaged in austerities there with other rishis, threw himself 
into his arms, and implored his assitance, urging his orphan, 
friendless, and helpless state, as claims on the sage’s benevolence. 
Vishvamitra soothed him; and pressed his own sons to offer 
themselves as victims in the room of Sunassepa. This proposition 
met with no favour from Madhushanda and the other sons of 
the royal hermit, who answered with haughtiness and derison: 
“How is it that thou sacrificest thine own sons, and seekest to 
rescue those of others ? We look upon this as wrong, and like the 
eating of one’s own flesh”. The sage was exceedingly wrath at this 
disregard of his injunction, and doomed his sons to be born in the 
most degraded classes, like Vashishtha’s sons, and to eat dog’s 
flesh, for a thousand years. He then said to Sunassepa: “When 
thou art bound with hallowed cords, decked with a red garland, 
and anointed with unguents, and fastened to the sacrificial post 
of Vishnu, then address thyself to Agni, and sing these two divine 
verses (gathas), at the sacrifice of Ambarisha; then shall thou 
attain the fulfilment of thy desire”. Being furnished with the two 
gathas, Sunassepa proposed at once to King Ambarisha that they 
should set out for their destination. Then bound at the stake to 
be immolated, dressed in a red garment, “he celebrated the two 
Gods, Indra and his younger brother (Vishnu), with the excellent 
verses. The thousand-eyed (Indra) was pleased with the sacred 
hymn, and bestowed long life on Sunassepa”. King Ambarisha also 
received great benefits from this sacrifice. Vishvamitra meanwhile 
proceeded with his austerities, which he prolonged for a thousand 
years, “At the end of this time the Gods came to allot his reward; 
and Brahma announced that he had attained the rank of a rishi, 
thus apparently advancing an additional step. Dissatisfied, as it 
would seem, with this, the sage commenced his task of penance 
anew. After a length of time he beheld the nymph (Apsara) Menka, 
who had come to bathe in the lake of Pushkara. She flashed on his 
view, unequalled in her radiant beauty, like lightning in a cloud. 
He was smitten by her charms, invited her to be his companion in 
his hermitage, and for ten years remained a slave to her witchery, 
to the great prejudice of his austerities. At length he became 
ashamed of this ignoble subjection, and full of indignation at 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


59 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 59 

what he believed to be a device of the Gods to disturb his devotion; 
and, dismissing the nymph with gentle accents, he departed for 
the northern mountains, where he practised severe austerities 
for a thousand years on the banks of the Kausiki river. The Gods 
became alarmed at the progress he was making, and decided 
that he should be dignified with the appellation of great rishi 
(Maharshi); and Brahma, giving effect to the general opinion of 
the deities, announced that he had conferred that rank upon him. 
Joining his hands and bowing his head, Vishvamitra replied that 
he should consider himself to have indeed completely subdued his 
senses, if the incomparable title of Brahmin-rishi were conferred 
upon him. Brahma informed him in answer, that he had not yet 
acquired the power of perfectly controling his senses; but should 
make further efforts with that view. The sage then began to put 
himself through a yet more rigourous course of austerities, standing 
with his arms erect, without support, feeding on air, in summer 
exposed to five fires (i.e. one on each of four sides, and the sun 
overhead), in the rainy season remaining unsheltered from the 
wet, and in winter lying on a watery couch night and day. This 
he continued for a thousand years. At last Indra and the other 
deities became greatly distressed at the idea of the merit he 
was storing up, and the power which he was thereby acquiring; 
and the chief of the celestials desired the nymph Rambha to 
go and bewitch him by her blandishments. She expressed great 
reluctance to expose herself to the wrath of the formidable muni, 
but obeyed the repeated injunction of Indra, who promised that 
he and Kandarpa (the God of love) should stand by her, and 
assumed her most attractive aspect with the view of overcoming 
the sage’s impassibility. He, however, suspected this design, and 
becoming greatly incensed, he doomed the numph by a curse to 
be turned into stone and to continue in that state for a thousand 
years. The curse took effect, and Kandarpa and Indra sunk away. 

In this way, though he resisted the allurements of sensual love, 
he lost the whole fruit of his austerities by yielding to anger; 
and had to begin his work over again. He resolved to check his 
irresistibility, to remain silent, not even to breathe for hundreds 
of years; to dry up his body; and to fast and stop his breath till 
he had obtained the coveted character of a Brahmin. He then left 
the Himalaya and travelled to the east, where he underwent a 
dreadful exercise, unequalled in the whole history of austerities, 
maintaining silence, according to a vow, for a thousand years. At 
the end of this time he had attained to perfection, and although 
thwarted by many obstacles, he remained unmoved by anger. On 
the expiration of this course of austerity, he prepared some food 
to eat; which Indra, coming in the form of a Brahmin, begged 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


60 


60 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

that he would give him. Vishvamitra did so, and though he had 
‘done left for himself, and was obliged to remain fasting, he said 
nothing to the Brahmin, on account of his vow of silence. “As he 
continued to suspend his breath, smoke issued from his head, to 
the great consternation and distress of the three worlds.” The Gods, 
rishis, etc., then addressed Brahma. “The great muni Vishvamitra 
has been allured and provoked in various ways, but still advances 
in his sanctity. If his wish is not conceded, he will destroy the three 
worlds by the force of his austerity. All the regions of the universe 
are confounded, no light anywhere shines; all the oceans are tossed, 
and the mountains crumble, the earth quakes, and the wind blows 
confusedly. We cannot, O Brahma, guarantee that mankind shall 

not become atheistic Before the great and glorious sage of 

fiery form resolves to destroy (everything) let him be propitiated.” 

The Gods, headed by Brahma, then addressed Vishvamitra : ‘Hail, 
Brahman rishi, we are gratified by the austerity ; O Kausika, 
thou hast, through their intensity, attained to Brahmahood. I, O 
Brahman, associated with the Maruts, confers on thee long life. 

May every blessing attend thee; depart whereever thou wilt.’ The 
sage, delighted, made his obeisance to the Gods, and said : ‘If 
I have obtained Brahmahood, and long life, then let the mystic 
monosyllable (omkara) and the sacrificial formula (vashatkara) 
and the Vedas recognise me in that capacity. And let Vashishtha, 
the son of Brahmin, the most eminent of those who are skilled in 
the Kshatra-Veda, and the Brahma-Veda (the knowledge of the 
Kshatriya and the Brahmnical disciplines), address me similarly’ 

Accordingly Vashishtha, being propitiated by the Gods, 

became reconciled to Vishvamitra, and recognised his claim fo all 

the prerogatives of a Brahman rishi Vishvamitra, too having 

attained the Brahmanical rank, paid all honour to Vashishtha”. 

The second event has a reference to the slaughter of the Brahmins 
by the Kshatriyas. It is related in the Adiparva of the Mahabharat from 
which the following account is taken: — 

“There was a King named Kritrvirya, by whose liberality the 
Bhrigus, learned in the Vedas, who officiated as his priests, had 
been greatly enriched with corn and money. After he had gone 
to heaven, his descendants were in want of money, and came to 
beg for a supply from the Bhrigus, of whose wealth they were 
aware. Some of the latter hid their money under ground, others 
bestowed it on Brahmins, being afraid of the Kshatriyas, while 
others again gave these last what they wanted. It happened, 
however, that a Kshatriya, while digging the ground, discovered 
some money buried in the house of Bhrigu. The Kshatriyas 
then assembled and saw this treasure, and, being incensed, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


61 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 61 

slew in consequence all the Bhrigus, who they regarded with 
contempt, down to the children, in the womb. The widows, however, 
fled to the Himalaya mountains. One of them concealed her unborn 
child in her thigh. The Kshatriya, hearing of its existence from 
a Brahmani informant, sought to kill it; but it issued forth from 
its mother’s thigh with lustre, and blinded the persecutors. After 
wandering about bewildered among the mountains for a time, they 
humbly supplicated the mother of the child for the restoration of 
their sight; but she referred them to her wonderful infant Aurva 
into whom the whole Veda, with its six Vedangas, had entered as 
the person who (in retaliation of the slaughter of his relatives) 
had robbed them of their eyesight, and who alone could restore 
it. They accordingly had recourse to him, and their eyesight was 
restored. Aurva, however, meditated the destruction of all living 
creatures, in revenge for the slaughter of the Bhrigus, and entered 
on a course of austerities which alarmed both Gods, Asuras, and 
men; but his progenitors (Pitris) themselves appeared, and sought 
to turn him from his purpose by saying that they had no desire 
to be revenged on the Kshatriyas: “It was not from weakness that 
the devout Bhrigus overlooked the massacre prepetrated by the 
murderous Kshatriyas. When we became distressed by old age, 
we ourselves desired to be slaughtered by them. The money which 
was buried by someone in a Bhrigu’s house was placed there for 
the purpose of exciting hatred, by those who wished to provoke 
the Kshatriyas. For what had we, who were desiring heaven, to do 
with money?” They added that they hit upon this device because 
they did not wish to be guilty of suicide, and concluded by calling 
upon Aurva to restrain his wrath; and abstain from the sin he was 
meditating, “Destroy not the Kshatriyas. Oh, son, nor the seven 
worlds. Suppress thy kindled anger which nullifies the power of 
austere fervour.” Aurva, however, replies that he cannot allow 
his threat to remain unexecuted. His anger, unless wreaked upon 
some other object, will, he says, consume himself. And he argues 
on grounds of justice, expediency, and duty, against the clemency 
which his progenitors recommend. He is, however, persuaded by 
the Pitris to throw the fire of his anger into the sea, where they 
say it will find exercise in assailing the watery element, and in 
this way his threat will be fulfilled.” 

The third event has reference to the slaughter of the Kshatriyas by 
the Brahmins. This story is told in several places in the Mahabharat. 

The magnificent and mighty Kartavirya, possessing a thousand 
arms, was lord of this whole world, living in Mahishmati. This 
Haihaya of unquestioned valour ruled over the whole sea-girt earth, 
with its oceans and continents. He obtained boons from the Muni 
Dattatreya, a thousand arms whenver he should go into battle, power 
to make the conquest of the whole earth, a disposition to rule it with 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


62 


62 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

justice and the promise of instruction from the virtuous in the 
event of his going astray. “Then ascending his chariot glorious 
as the resplendent Sun, he exclaimed in the intoxication of his 
prowess, ‘Who is like me in fortitude, courage, fame, herosim, 
energy, and vigour?’ At the end of this speech a bodyless voice in 
the sky addressed him: ‘Thou knowest not, O fool, that a Brahman 
is better than Kshatriya. It is with the help of the Brahman 
that the Kshatriya rules his subjects.’ Arjuna answers: ‘If I am 
pleased, I can create, or, if displeased, annihilate living beings; 
and no Brahman is superior to me in act, thought or word. The 
first proposition is that the Brahmins are superior; the second that 
the Kshatriyas are superior; both of these thou hast stated with 
their grounds, but there is a difference between them (in point 
of force). The Brahmins are dependent on the Kshatriyas and not 
the Kshatriyas on the Brahmins, who wait upon them, and only 
make the Vedas a pretence. Justice, the protection of the people, 
has its seat in the Kshatriyas. From them the Brahmins derive 
their livelihood; how then can the latter be superior? I always keep 
in subjection myself those Brahmins, the chief of all beings, who 
subsist on alms and who have a high opinion of themselves. For 
truth was spoken by that female the Gayatri in the sky. I shall 
subdue alt those unruly Brahmins clad in hides. No one in the 
three worlds, god or man, can hurl me from my royal authority; 
therefore I am superior to any Brahman. Now shall I turn the 
world in which Brahmins have the upper hand into a place where 
Kshatriyas shall have the uper hand; for no one dares to encounter 
my force in battle.’ Hearing this speech of Arjun, the female roving 
in the night became alarmed. Then Vayu hovering in the air, said 
to Arjuna: ‘Abandon this sinful disposition, and do obeisance to 
the Brahmins. If thou shall do them wrong, thy kingdom shall be 
convulsed. They will subdue thee; those powerful men will humble 
thee, and expel thee from thy country.’ The King asks him, ‘Who 
art thou?’ Vayu replies, ‘I am Vayu, the messenger of the Gods, 
and tell thee what is for thy benefit.’ Arjuna rejoins, ‘Oh, thou 
displayest today a great warmth of devotion to the Brahmins. But 
say that a Brahman is like (any other) earth-horn creature.” 

This king came into conflict with Parsuram the son of a Brahman 
sage Jamadagni. The history of this conflict is as follows: — 

There lived a king of Kanyakubja, called Gadhi, who had 
a daughter named Satyavati. The marriage of this princess 
to the rishi Richika, and the birth of Jamadagni, are then 
told in nearly the same way as above narrated. Jamadagni 
and Satyavati had five sons, the youngest of whom was 
the redoubtable Parasuram. By his father’s command he 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


63 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 63 

kills his mother (who, by the indulgence of impure desire, had 
fallen from her previous sanctity), after the four elder sons had 
refused this matricidal offence, and had in consequence been 
deprived of reason by their father’s curse. At Parasuram’s desire, 
however, his mother is restored by his father to life, and his 
brothers to reason; and he himself is absolved from all the guilt 
of murder; and obtains the boon of invincibility and long life from 
his father. His history now begins to be connected with that of 
king Arjuna (or Kartavirya). The latter had come to Jamadagni’s 
hermitage, and had been respectfully received by his wife; but 
he had requited this honour by carrying away by force the calf 
of the sage’s sacrificial cow, and breaking down his lofty trees. 

On being informed of this violence, Parasurama was filled with 
indignation, attacked Arjuna, cut off his thousand arms, and slew 
him. Arjuna’s sons, in return slew the peaceful sage Jamadagni, 
in the absence of Parasuram. 

Rama, after performing, on his return, his father’s funeral 
obsequies, vowed to destroy the whole Kshatriya race; and execucted 
his threat by killing first Arjun’s sons and their followers. Twenty 
one times did he sweep away all the Kshatriyas from the earth, 
and formed five lakes of blood in Samantpanchaka; in which he 
satiated the manes of the Bhrigus, and beheld face to face (his 
grandfather), Richika, who addressed himself to Rama. The latter 
gratified Indra by offering to him a grand sacrifice, and gave the 
earth to the officiating priests. He bestowed also a golden altar, 
ten fathoms long and nine high, on the mighty Kasyapa. This, by 
his permission, the Brahmins divided among themselves, deriving 
thence the name of Khandavavanas. Having given away the earth 
to Kasyapa, Parasuram himself dwells on the mountain Mahendra. 

Thus did enmity arise between him and Kshatriyas, and thus was 
the earth conquered by Parasuram of boundless might.” 

The Kshatriyas who were slain by Parasuram are described in the 
Dronaparvan of the Mahabharata as of various provinces, viz., Kasmiras, 
Daradas, Kuntis, Kshudrakas, Malavas, Angas, Vangas, Kalingas, 
Videhas, Tamraliptakas, Marttikavatas, Sivis and other Rajanyas. 

The means by which the Kshattriya race was restored is also told 
as part of this story of anihilation of the Kshatriyas by the Brahmins. 
It is said: — 

“Having one and twenty times swept away all the Kshatriyas 
from the earth, the son of Jamdagni engaged in austerities on 
Mahendra the most excellent of mountains. After he had cleared the 
world of Kshatriyas, their widows came to the Brahmins, praying 
for offspring. The religious Brahmins, free from any impulse of lust 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


64 


64 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

cohabited at the proper seasons with these women, who in 
consequence became pregnant, and brought forth valiant Kshatriya 
boys and girls, to continue the Kshatriya stock. Thus was the 
Kshatriya race virtuously begotten by Brahmins on Kshatriya 
women, and became multiplied and long lived. Thence there 
arose four castes inferior to the Brahmins.” 

No country has such a dismal record of class war as Hindustan. It 
was the proud boast of the Brahmin Parsuram that he exterminated the 
Kshatriyas twenty one times from the face of Hindustan and recreated 
them by Brahmans cohabiting with the widows of the Kshatriyas. 

It must not be supposed that this Class War in India is a matter of 
ancient History. It has been present all along. Its existence was very 
much noticeable in Maharashtra during the Maratha Rule. It destroyed 
the Maratha Empire. It must not be supposed that these class Wars 
were like ordinary wars which are a momentary phenomena which 
come and go and which leave no permanent chasms to divide the 
peoples of the different nations. In India the class war is a permanent 
phenomenon which is silently but surely working its way. It is a grain 
in the life and it has become genius of the Hindus. 

These facts it will not be denied are symptomatic in the sense they 
indicate health and character. Do they suggest that there is fraternity 
among Hindus? In the face of these facts I am sure it would be 
impossible to give an affirmative answer. 

What is the explanation of this absence of fraternity among the 
Hindus ? It is Hinduism and its philosophy that is responsible for it. 
The sentiment of fraternity as Mill said is natural but it is a plant 
which grows only where the soil is propitious and the conditions for 
its growth exist. The fundamental condition for the growth of the 
sentiment of fraternity is not preaching that we are children of God 
or the realization that one’s life is dependent upon others. It is too 
rational to give rise to a sentiment. The condition for the growth of 
this sentiment of fraternity lies in sharing in the vital processes of 
life. It is sharing in the joys and sorrows of birth, death, marriage 
and food. Those who participate in these come to feel as brothers. 
Prof. Smith very rightly emphasizes the importance of sharing food 
as a prime factor in the creation of community feeling when he says; 

“The sacrificial meal was an appropriate expression of the 
antique ideal of religious life, not merely because it was a social 
act and in which the God and his worshippers were conceived as 
partaking together, but because, as has already been said, the very 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


65 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 


65 


act of eating and drinking with a man was a symbol and a 
confirmation of fellowship and mutual social obligations. The one 
thing directly expressed in the sacrficial meal is that the God and 
his worshippers are commensals but every other point in their 
mutual relations is included in what this involves. Those who sit 
at meal together are united for all social effects; those who do not 
eat together are aliens to one another, without fellowship in religion 
and without reciprocal social duties”.’ 

There is no sharing among Hindus of joys and sorrows involved in 
the vital facts of life. Everything is separate and exclusive. The Hindu 
is separate and exclusive all through his life. A foreigner coming to 
India will not find men crying Hindu Pani (water for Hindus) and 
Musalman Pani (water for Musalmans). He will find Brahmin Coffee 
Houses, Brahmin Eating Houses, where no non-Brahmin Hindus can 
go. He will find Brahmin Maternity Homes, Maratha Maternity Homes 
and Bhatia Maternity Homes although Brahmins, Marathas and Bhatias 
are all Hindus. If there is a birth at the house of a Brahmin, no non- 
Brahmin will be invited nor will he feel the desire to join. If there is 
marriage in the family of a Brahmin, no non-Brahmin will be invited 
nor will he feel the desire to join if a Brahmin dies, no non-Brahmin 
will be invited to join the funeral nor will he think it necessary to join 
in the procession. If there is a festivity in the house of a Brahmin, no 
non-Brahmin will be called and no non-Brahmin will feel any wrong 
about it. Joys and sorrows of one caste are not the joys and sorrows 
of another. One caste has no concern with other castes. Even charity 
has become caste bound. Among Hindus there is no public charity in 
the sense of its benefit being open to all. You have Brahmin Charity 
for Brahmins. Within that you have Chitpavan Brahmin Charity for 
Chitpavan Brahmins only. Deshastha Brahmin Charity for Deshastha 
Brahmins only, Karhada Brahmin Charity for Karahda Brahmins only. 
You have Sarasvat Brahmin Charity. Within that you have Kudaldeshkar 
Brahmin Charity. One could go on with such instances ad nauseum to 
show the exclusive character of Hindu Charity — rather Charity among 
Hindus — for there is no such thing as Hindu Charity. Thus one Hindu 
will share nothing with another Hindu while they are alive. But they 
will be separate and exclusive even when they are dead. Some Hindus 
bury their dead. Some Hindus burn their dead. But those bury will not 
share the same cemetery. Each will appropriate a part of the cemetery 
to bury its dead. Those who burn will not burn at the same burning 
place. If they do, each will have a separate funeral pan. 

Is there any wonder that the sentiment of fraternity is foreign to the 
Hindus? With a complete refusal to share the joys and sorrows of life 
how can the sentiment of fraternity take roots? 

1 The Religion of the Semites — p.269. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


66 


66 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

But the question of all questions is why do the Hindus refuse to 
share the joys and sorrows of life? It needs no saying that he refuses to 
share because his religion tells him not to share them. This conclusion 
need cause no surprize. For what does Hinduism teach? It teaches not 
to interdine, not to inermarry, not to associate. These don’ts constitute 
the essence of its teaching. All the shameful facts I have referred to, 
to illustrate the separate and exclusive character of the Hindus is the 
direct outcome of this philosopy of Hindusim. The philosopy of Hinduism 
is a direct denial of fraternity. 

This brief analysis of the Philosopy of Hinduism from the point of 
view of justice reveals in a glaring manner how Hinduism is inimical 
to equality, antagonistic to liberty and opposed to fraternity. 

Fraternity and liberty are really derivative notions. The basic and 
fundamental conceptions are equality and respect for human personality. 
Fraternity and liberty take their roots in these two fundamental 
conceptions. Digging further down it may be said that equality is the 
original notion and respect for human personality is a reflexion of it. 
So that where equality is denied, everything else may be taken to be 
denied. In other words it was enough for me to have shown that there 
was no equality in Hinduism. But as Hinduism has not been examined 
so far in the manner I have done, I did not think it sufficient to leave 
it to implication that Hinduism was a denial of Fraternity and Liberty 
as well. 

There is one final observation with which I wish to conclude this 
discussion with the profound observation of Lord Acton. The great Lord 
says that inequality has grown as a result of historical circumstances. 
It has never been adopted as a creed. It is obvious that in making this 
observation Lord Acton must have omitted to take note of Hinduism. For 
in Hinduism inequality is a religious doctrine adopted and conscientiously 
preached as a sacred dogma. It is an official creed and nobody is ashamed 
to profess it openly. Inequality for the Hindus is a divinely prescribed 
way of life as a religious doctrine and as a prescribed way of life, it has 
become incarnate in Hindu Society and is shaped and moulded by it in 
its thoughts and in its doings. Indeed inequality is the Soul of Hinduism. 

Let me now turn to the examination of the philosophy of Hinduism 
from the point of view of Utility. 

This examination of Hinduism from this aspect need not be long and 
detailed. For as Mill pointed out there is no necessary antagoism between 
justice and utility. In other words what is unjust to the individual cannot 
be useful to society. Apart from this we have before us the consequences 
of caste staring us in the face. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


67 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 67 

The ideal of caste was not mere ideal. The ideal was put into 
practice; was therefore something real. So that, in the matter of the 
Chaturvarna the Hindus have very faithfully followed the German 
Philosopher Nietszche who said “Realize the ideal and idealize the real”, 

The value of the ideal must be tested by its results. If experience 
therefore must be the criterion then the ideal of Chaturvarna stands 
thrice condemned. Purely as a form of social orgaization it stands 
condemned. As a producer’s organization it stands discredited. As an 
ideal scheme of distribution it has miserably failed. If it is an ideal 
form of organization how is it that the Hinduism has been unable to 
form a common front. If it is an ideal form of production, how is it that 
its technique never advanced beyond that of the primitive man. If it is 
an ideal form of distribution, how is it that it has produced appalling 
inequality of wealth, immense wealth side by side extreme poverty. 

But I do not wish to dismiss the subject so summarily, for I know 
many Hindus who claim great social utility to the institution of caste 
and praise Manu for having been so wise and so thoughtful not only 
in devising it but in giving it a divine sanction. 

This view of the caste is due to taking the separate aspects of caste 
separately. One must take them in conjunction. The resultant social 
utility or disutility of caste can be ascertained only by putting together 
the separate aspects of caste and judge them in their combination. 
Following this line of attacking the problem, the following conclusions 
follow : — 

(1) Caste divides Labourers (2) Caste disassociates work from 
interest (3) Caste disconnects intelligence from manual labour (4) Caste 
devitalises by denying to him the right to cultivate vital interest and 
(5) Caste prevents mobilization. Caste System is not merely division 
of labour. IT IS ALSO A DIVISION OF LABOURERS. Civlized 
society undoubtedly needs division of labour. But in no civilized 
society is division of labour accompanied by this unnatural division 
of labourers into water-tight compartments. Caste System is not 
merely a division of labourers — which is quite different from division 
of labour — it is an hierarchy in which the divisions of labourers are 
graded one above the other. In no other country is the division of 
labour accompanied by this gradation of labourers. There is also a 
third point of criticism against this view of the Caste System. This 
division of labour is not spontaneous, it is not based on natural 
aptitudes. Social and individual efficiency requires us to develop the 
capacity of an individual to the point of competency to chose and to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


68 


68 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

make his own career. This principle is violated in the Caste System in so 
far as it involves an attempt to appoint tasks to individuals in advance, 
selected not on the basis of trained original capacities, but on that of 
the social status of the parents. Looked at from another point of view 
this stratification of occupations which is the result of the Caste System 
is positively pernicious. Industry is never static. It undergoes rapid and 
abrupt changes. With such changes an individual must be free to change 
his occupations. Without such freedom to adjust himself to changing 
circumstances it would be impossible for him to gain his livelihood. Now 
the Caste System will not allow Hindus to take occupations where they 
are wanted if they do not belong to them by heredity. If a Hindu is 
seen to starve rather than take to new occupations not assigned to his 
Caste, the reason is to be found in the Caste System. By not permitting 
readjustment of occupations, caste becomes a direct cause of much of the 
unemployment we see in the country. As a form of division of labour 
the Caste System suffers from another serious defect. The division of 
labour brought about by the Caste System is not a division based on 
choice. Individual sentiment, individual preference has no place in it. It is 
based on the dogma of predestination. Considerations of social efficiency 
would compel us to recognize that the greatest evil in the industrial 
system is not so much poverty and the suffering that it involves, as 
the fact that so many persons have callings which make no appeal to 
those who are engaged in them. Such callings constantly provoke one to 
aversion, ill will and the desire to evade. There are many occupations in 
India which on account of the fact that they are regarded as degraded 
by the Hindus provoke those who are engaged in it to aversion. There 
is a constant desire to evade and escape from such occupations which 
arises solely because of the blighting effect which they produce upon 
those who follow them owing to the slight and stigma cast upon them 
by the Hindu religion. 

The second mischief it dose is to dissociate intelligence from work and 
create contempt for labour. The theory of the Caste is that a Brahmin 
who is permitted to cultivate his intellect is not permitted to labour, 
indeed is taught to look down upon labour. While the Shudra who is 
required to labour is not permitted to cultivate his intelligence. The 
disastrous consequences of this have been well protrayed by Mr. R. C. 
Dutt.* 

Caste devitalizes a man. It is a process of sterilization. Education, 
wealth, labour are all necessary for every individual if he is to reach 
a free and full manhood. Mere education without wealth and labour is 

* Quotation not given in the MS . — Editors 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


69 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 69 

barren. Wealth without education and wealth is brutal. Each is 
necessary to every one. They are necessary for the growth of a man. 

That the Brahmin should cultivate knowledge, Kshatriya should bear 
arms, the Vaishya should trade and that the Shudra should serve is 
presented as a theory of mutual interdependence found in the family. 
It is asked why should the Shudra need trouble to acquire wealth when 
the three Varnas are there to support him; Why need the Shudra bother 
to take to education when the Brahmin to whom he can go when the 
occasion for reading or writing arises; Why need the Shudra worry to 
arm himself because there is the Kshatriya to protect him? The theory 
of Chaturvarnya understood in this sense may be said to look upon 
the Shudra as the ward and the three Varnas as his guardians. Thus 
interpreted it is a simple and alluring theory. Assuming this to be the 
correct view of the underlying conception of Chaturvarnya it seems to me 
that the system is neither fool-proof nor knave-proof. What is to happen 
if the Brahmins, Vaishyas nd Kshatriyas fail to pursue knowledge, to 
engage in economic enterprises and to be efficient soldiers which are 
their respecive functions? Contrarywise, suppose that they discharge 
their functions but flout their duty to the Shudra or to one another? 
What is to happen to the Shudra if the three classes refuse to support 
him on fair terms or combine to keep him down? Who is to safeguard 
the interests of the Shudra or for the matter of that of the Vaishya 
and Kshatriya when the person who is trying to take advantage of his 
ignorance is the Brahmin ? Who is to defend the liberty of the Shudra or 
that of the Brahmin and the Vaishya, when the person who is robbing 
him of it is the Kshatriya? Inter-dependence of one class on another 
class is inevitable. Even dependence of one class upon another may 
sometimes become allowable. But why make one person depend upon 
another in the matter of his vital needs? Education every one must 
have. Means of defence every one must have. These are the paramount 
requirements of every man for his self-preservation. How can the fact 
that his neighbour is educated and armed, help a man who is uneducated 
and disarmed. The whole theory is absurd. These are the questions 
which the defenders of Chaturvarnya do not seem to be troubled about. 
But they are very pertinent questions. Assuming their conception of 
Chaturvarnya that the relationship between the different classes is that 
of ward and guardian is the real conception underlying Chaturvarnya, 
it must be admitted that it makes no provision to safeguard the 
interests of the ward from the misdeeds of the guardian. Whether the 
relationship of guardian and ward was the real underlying conception 
on which Chaturvarnya was based there is no doubt that in practice 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


70 


70 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the relation was that of master and servant. The three classes, 
Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas although not very happy in their 
mutual relationship managed to work by compromise. The Brahmin 
flattered the Kshatriya and both let the Vaishya live in order to be 
able to live upon him. But the three agreed to beat down the Shudra. 
He was not allowed to acquire wealth lest he should be independent 
of the three Varnas. He was prohibited from acquiring knowledge 
lest he should keep a steady vigil regading his interests. He was 
prohibited from bearing arms lest he should have the means to rebel 
against their authority. That this is how the Shudras were treated 
by the Trayavarnikas is evidenced by the Laws of Manu. There is no 
code of laws more infamous regarding social rights than the Laws of 
Manu. Any instance from anywhere of social injustice must pale before 
it. Why have the mass of people tolerated the social evils to which 
they have been subjected? There have been social revolutions in other 
countries of the world. Why have there not been social revolutions 
in India is a question which has incessantly troubled me. There is 
only one answer which I can give and it is that the lower classes of 
Hindus have been completely disabled for direct action on account of 
this wretched system of Chaturvarnya. They could not bear arms and 
without arms they could not rebel. They were all ploughmen or rather 
condemned to be ploughmen and they were allowed to convert their 
ploghshares into swords. They had no bayonets and therefore everyone 
who chose ploughs did sit upon them. On account of the Chaturvarnya 
they could receive no education. They could not think out or know 
the way to their salvation. They were condemned to be lowly and not 
knowing the way of escape and not having the means of escape, they 
became reconciled to eternal servitudes which they accepted as their 
inescapable fate. It is true that even in Europe the strong has not 
shrunk from the exploitation, nay the spoliation of the weak but in 
Europe, the strong have never contrived to make the weak helpless 
against exploitation so shamelessly as was the case in India among 
the Hindus. Social war has been raging between the strong and the 
weak far more violently in Europe than it has ever been in India. Yet 
the weak in Europe has had in him freedom of military service his 
physical weapon, in suffrage his political weapon and in education his 
moral weapon. Three weapons for emancipation were never withheld by 
the strong from the weak in Europe. All these weapons were however 
denied to the masses in India by Chaturvarnya. There cannot be a 
more degrading system of social organization than Chaturvarnya. It 
is the system which deadens, paralyses and cripples the people from 
helpful activity. This is no exaggeration. History bears ample evidence. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


71 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 71 

There is only one period in Indian history which is a period of 
freedom, greatness and glory. That is the period of the Mourya 
Empire. At all other times the country suffered from defeat and 
darkness. But the Mourya period was a period when Chaturvarnya 
was completely annihilated, when the Shudras, who constituted the 
mass of the people came into their own and became the rulers of 
the country. The period of defeat and darkness is the period when 
Chaturvarnya flourished to the damnation of the greater part of the 
people of the country. 

Caste prevents mobilization. Occasions arise when society must 
mobilize all its resources to one end in order to save itself from a 
catastrophy. To take a catastrophy like war, Society must mobilize 
all its resources for militarization. Every one must do war. Every 
one must be a soldier. Is this possible under the theory of caste? 
Obviously not. Indeed the destiny of a defeat which has been the lot 
of India throughout history is due to caste. Caste prevented general 
mobilization. Or the extent of mobilization was of a very limited 
character. Only the Kshatriyas were expected to fight. The rest the 
Brahmins and the Vaishyas were not armed and the Shudras who 
formed the large majority of the country were disarmed. The result 
was that once the small class of Kshatriyas were defeated by a foreign 
foe the whole country fell at his feet. It could offer no resistence. It 
was not capable of resistence. Indian wars have been mostly wars 
of single battles or single campaigns. This was due to the fact that 
once the Kshatriyas fell everything fell. Why? Simply because there 
was no general mobilization and the theory deeply imbedded in the 
psychology of the people. 

If these conclusions are sound, how can a philosophy which dissects 
society in fragments, which dissociates work from interest, which 
disconnects intelligence from labour, which expropriates the rights 
of man to interests vital to life and which prevented society from 
mobilizing resources for common action in the hour of danger, be 
said to satisfy the test of Social Utility. 

IV 

The Philosophy of Hinduism therefore neither satisfies the test of 
social utility nor does it satisfy the test of individual justice. 

The result of my analysis is so odd that it will surprise many. 
Astonished some may even say that if the conclusions are so odd then 
there must be something wrong in my analysis of the philosophy of 
Hinduism. I must meet this objection. To those who refuse to accept 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


72 


72 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

my analysis I say that they find my analysis odd because they do not 
have a correct notion what is central in the philosophy of Hinduism. If 
they do they will feel no surprise at my conclusions. 

This matter is so important that I must stop to explain it. It may be 
recalled that the foregoing analysis of the religious revolution showed 
that religious ideals as forms of divine governance for human Society 
fall into two classes, one in which Society is the centre and the other 
in which the Individual is the centre. The same analysis showed that 
for the former the appropriate test of what is good and what is right 
i.e. the test of the moral order is utility while for the latter the test is 
justice. Now the reason why the philosophy of Hinduism does not answer 
the test either of utility or of justice is because the religious ideal of 
Hinduism for divine governance of human society is an ideal which falls 
into a separate class by itself. It is an ideal in which the individual is 
not the centre. The centre of the ideal is neither individual nor society. 
It is a class — the class of Supermen called Brahmins, Those who will 
bear the dominant and devastating fact in mind will understand why 
the philosophy of Hinduism is not founded on individual justice or social 
utility. The philosophy of Hinduism is founded on a totally different 
principle. To the question what is right and what is good the answer 
which the philosophy of Hinduism gives is remarkable. It holds that to be 
right and good the act must serve the interest of this class of supermen, 
namely, the Brahmins. Oscar Wilde said that to be intelligible is to 
be found out. Manu is neither afraid nor ashamed of being found out. 
Indeed Manu does not leave it to be found out. He expresses his view 
in resonent and majestic notes as who are the Supermen and anything 
which serves the interest of the Supermen is alone entitled to be called 
right and good. Let me quote Manu. 

X. 3. “On account of his pre-eminence, on account of the superiority 
of his origin, on account of his observance of (particular) restrictive 
rules, and on account of his particular sanctification the Brahman is 
the Lord of (all) Varnas.” 

He proceeds to amplify his reasons and does so in the following 
characteristic manner: — 

I. 93. “As the Brahmana sprang from (Prajapati’s i.e. Gods) mouth, 
as he was first-born, and as he possesses the Veda, he is by right the 
lord of this whole creation.” 

I. 94. For the self existent (Svayambhu i.e. God), having performed 
austerities, produced him first from his own mouth, in order that offerings 
might be conveyed to the Gods and Manes and that this universe might 
be preserved.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


73 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 


73 


I. 95. “What created being can surpass him, through whose mouth 
the gods continually consume the sacrificial viands and the manes the 
offerings to the dead?” 

I. 96. “ Of created beings the most excellent are said to be those which 
are animated; of the animated, those who subsist by intelligence; of the 
intelligent, mankind; and of the men, the Brahmanas”. 

Besides the reason given by Manu the Brahmin is first in rank because 
he was produced by God from his mouth, in order that the offerings 
might be conveyed to the Gods and manes. Manu gives another reason 
for the supremacy of the Brahmins. He says: — 

I. 98. “The very birth of a Brahmana is an eternal incarnation of the 
sacred Law (Veda); for he is born to (fulfil) the sacred law, and becomes 
one with Brahman (God).” 

I. 99. “A Brahamana, coming into existence, is born as the highest on 
earth, the lord of all created beings, for the protection of the treasury 
of the Law.” 

Manu concludes by saying that: — 

I. 101. “The Brahman eats but his own food, wears but his own 
apparel, bestows but his own in alms; other mortals subsist through 
the benevolence of the Brahamana.” 

Because according to Manu: — 

II. 100. “Whatever exists in the world is the property of the Brahmana; 
on account of the excellence of his origin the Brahmana is, indeed, 
entitled to it all.” 

Manu directs: — 

VII. 36. “Let the King, after rising early in the morning, worship 
Brahmans who are well versed in the three-fold sacred science and 
learned (in polity), and follow their advice”. 

VII. 38. “ Let him daily worship aged Brahmans who know the Veda 
and are pure ” 

VII. 37. “ Let the king, having risen at early dawn, respectfully attend 
to Brahman, learned in the three Vedas and in the science of ethics, 
and by their decision let him abide.” 

VII. 38. “Constantly must he show respect to Brahmans, who have 
grown old, both in years and in piety, who know the scriptures, who in 
body and mind are pure; for he, who honours the aged, will perpetually 
be honoured even by cruel demons.” 

IX. 313. “Let him not, although in the greatest distress for money, 
provoke Brahmans to anger by taking their propery; for they, once 
enraged, could immediately by sacrifices and imprecations destroy him 
with his troops, elephants, horses and cars.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


74 


74 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Finally Manu says: — 

XI. 35. “The Brahman is (hereby) declared (to be) the creator (of 
the world), the punisher, the teacher, (and hence) a benefactor (of all 
created beings); to him let no man say anything unpropitious; nor use 
any harsh words”. 

To conclude and complete the theory of supermen and of what is right 
and good let me reproduce the following two texts from Manu: — 

X. 122. But let a Shudra serve Brahmans, either for the sake of heaven 
or with a view to both this life and the next, for he who is called the 
servant of a Brahman thereby gains all his ends. 

X. 123. The service of the Brahmana alone is declared to be an 
excellent occupation for a Shudra; for whatever else besides this he may 
perform will bear no fruit. 

And Manu adds : — 

X. 129. No collection of wealth must be made by a Shudra, even 
though he be able to do it; for a Shudra who has acquired wealth gives 
pain to Brahman. 

The above texts from Manu disclose the core and the heart of the 
philosophy of Hinduism. Hinduism is the gospel of the superman and 
it teaches that what is right for the superman is the only thing which 
is called morally right and morally good. 

Is there any parallel to this philosophy ? I hate to suggest it. But it is 
so obvious. The parallel to this philosophy of Hinduism is to be found in 
Nietzsche. The Hindus will be angry at this suggestion. It is quite natural. 
For the philosophy of Nietzsche stands in great odium. It never took roots, 
In his own words he was “sometimes deified as the philosopher of the 
aristrocracy and squirearchy, sometimes hooted at, sometimes pitied and 
sometimes boycotted as an inhuman being”. Nietzsche’s philosophy had 
become identified with will to power, violence, denial of spiritual values, 
superman and the sacrifice, servility and debasement of the common man. 
His philosophy with these high spots had created a certain loathsomeness 
and horror in the minds of the people of his own generation. He was 
utterly neglected if not shunned and Nietzsche himself took comfort by 
placing himself among the “posthumous men”. He foresaw for himself a 
remote public, centuries after his own time to appreciate him. Here too 
Nietzsche was destined to be disappointed. Instead of there being any 
appreciation of his philosophy, the lapse of time has only augmented the 
horror and loathing which people of his generation felt for Nietzsche. 
This is principally due to the revelation that the philosophy of Nietzsche 
is capable of producing Nazism. His friends have vehemently protested 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


75 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 75 

against such a construction . 1 But it is not difficult to see that his 
philosophy can be as easily applied to evolve a super state as to 
superman. This is What the Nazis have done. At any rate the 
Nazis trace their ancestry from Nietzsche and regard him as their 
spiritual parent. Hitler has himself photographed beside a bust of 
Nietzsche; he takes the manuscripts of the master under his own 
special guardianship; extracts are chosen from Nietzsche’s writings 
and loudly proclaimed at the ceremonies of Nazism, as the New 
German Faith. Nor is the claim by the Nazis of spiritual ancestry 
with Nietzsche denied by his near relations. Nietzsche’s own cousin 
Richard Ochler approvingly says that Nietzsche’s thought is Hitler 
in action and that Nietzsche was the foremost pioneer of the Nazi 
accession to power. Nietzsche’s own sister, few months before her 
death, thanks the Feurhar for the honour he graciously bestows 
on her brother declaring that she sees in him that incarnation of 
the “Superman” foretold by Zarathustra. 

To identify Nietzsche, whose name and whose philosophy excites 
so much horror and so much loathing; with Manu is sure to cause 
astonishment and resentment in the mind of the Hindus. But of 
the fact itself there can be no doubt. Nietszche himself has openly 
declared that in his philosophy he is only following the scheme of 
Manu. In his Anti Christ this is what Nietzsche says: — 

“After all, the question is, to what end are falsehoods perpetrated ? 
The fact that, in Christianity, ‘holy’ ends are entirely absent, constitutes 
my objection to the means it employs. Its ends are only bad ends; the 
poisoning, the calumniation and the denial of life, the contempt of the 
body, the degradation and self pollution of man by virtue of the concept 
of sin, - consequently its means are bad as well. My feelings are quite 
the reverse, When I read the law book of Manu, an incomparably 
intellectual and superior work, it would be a sin against the spirit 
even to mention in the same breath with the Bible. You will guess 
immediately why; it has a genuine philosophy behind it, in it, not merely 
an evil-smelling Jewish distillation of Rabbinism and superstition - 
it gives something to chew even to the most fastidious psychologist. 
And, not to forget the most important point of all, it is fundamentally 
different from every kind of Bible: by means of it the noble classes, 
the philosophers and the warriors guard and guide the masses; it 
is replete with noble values, it is filled with a feeling of perfection, 
with saying yea to life, and triumphant sense of well-being in regard 
to itself and to life, - the Sun shines upon the whole book. All those 

1 For this as also for facts which follow see M.P. Nicolas. “From Nietzsche Down to Hitler” 
1938. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


76 


76 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

things which Christianity smothers with its bottomless vulgarity; 
procreation, woman, marriage, are here treated with earnestness, 
with reverence, with love and confidence. How can one possibly 
place in the hands of children and women, a book that contains 
those vile words: “to avoid fornication, let every man have his 

own wife, and let every woman have her own husband it is 

better to marry than to burn”. And is it decent to be a Christian 
so long as the very origin of man is Christianised, - that is to say, 
befouled, by the idea of the immaculate conception?... I know of 
no book in which so many delicate and kindly things are said to 
woman, as in the Law Book of Manu; these old grey-beards and 
saints have a manner of being gallant to woman which, perhaps, 
cannot be surpassed. “The mouth of a woman”, says Manu on 
one occassion, “the breast of a maiden, the prayer of a child, and 
the smoke of the sacrifice, are always pure”. Elsewhere he says: 
“there is nothing purer than the light of the Sun, the shadow 
cast by a cow, air water, fire and the breath of a Maiden”. And 
finally-perhaps this is also a holy lie: — “all the openings of the 
body above the navel are pure, all those below the navel are 
impure. Only in a maiden is the whole body pure.” 

This leaves no doubt that Zarathustra is a new name for Manu 
and that Thus Spake Zarathustra is a new edition of Manu Smriti. 

If there is any difference between Manu and Nietzsche it lies in 
this. Nietzsche was genuinely interested in creating a new race of 
men which will be a race of supermen as compared with the existing 
race of men. Manu on the other hand was interested in maintaining 
the privileges of a class who had come to arrogate to itself the claim 
of being supermen. Nietzsche’s supermen were supermen by reason 
of their worth. Manu’s supermen were supermen by reason of their 
birth. Nietzsche was a genuine disinterested philosopher. Manu on 
the contrary was an hireling engaged to propound a philosophy 
which served the interests of a class born in a group and whose 
title to being supermen was not to be lost even if they lost their 
virtue. Compare the following texts from Manu. 

X. 81. “Yet a Brahman, unable to subsist by his duties just 
mentioned, may live by the duty of a soldier; for that is the 
next rank.” 

X. 82. “If it be asked, how he must live, should he be unable 
to get a subsistence by either of those employments; the answer 
is, he may subsist as a mercantile man, applying himself into 
tillage and attendance on cattle.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


77 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 


77 


Manu adds : 

IX. 317. “A Brahmana, be he ignorant or learned, is a great 
divinity, just as the fire, whether carried forth (for the performance 
of a burnt oblation ) or not carried forth, is a great divinity”. 

IX. 323. “ Thus, though the Brahmans employ themselves in all 
(sorts) of mean occupation, they must be honoured in every way 
(for each of) them is a very great diety”. 

Thus Manu’s is a degraded and degenerate philosophy of superman 
as compared with that of Nietzsche and therefore far more odious and 
loathsome than the philosophy of Nietzsche. 

This explains why the philosophy of Hinduism does not satisfy the 
test of justice or of utility. Hinduism is not interested in the common 
man. Hinduism is not interested in Society as a whole. The centre of 
its interest lies in a class and its philosophy is concerned in sustaining 
and supporting the rights of that class. That is why in the Philosophy 
of Hinduism the interests of the common man as well as of society 
are denied, suppressed and sacrificed to the interest of this class of 
Supermen. What is the value of such a religion to man ? Mr. Balfour 
in speaking on the merits of positivism as Religion asked the positivists 
certain questions which are worth recalling. He very pertinently asked; 

“What has (Positivism) to say to the more obscure multitude who 
are absorbed, and well nigh overwhelmed, in the constant struggle 
with daily needs and narrow cares; who have but little leisure or 
inclination to consider the precise role they are called on to play 
in the great drama of ‘humanity’ and who might in any case be 
puzzled to discover its interest or its importance ? Can it assure 
them that there is no human being so insignificant as not to be 
of infinite worth in the eyes of Him who created the Heavens, 
or so feeble but that his action may have consequence of infinite 
moment long after this material system shall have crumbled into 
nothingness ? Does it offer consolation to those who are bereaved, 
strength to the weak, forgiveness to the sinful, rest to those who 
are weary and heavy laden ?” 

The same questions may be asked of Manu. 

The answer to each one of them must be in the affirmative. 

In short the philosophy of Hinduism is such that it cannot be 
called the Religion of humanity. That is why to use the language of 
Balfour, Hinduism, if it penetrates, does not vitrify the inmost life of 
ordinary humanity. Indeed if it does anything it paralyses it. There 
is in Hinduism no nourishment for ordinary human souls, no comfort 
for ordinary human sorrow, no help for ordinary human weakness. It 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


78 


78 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

leaves men in darkness face to face with the unthinking energies of 
nature which gives them birth to which after a few fruitless struggles 
they succumb. Not less cruel than the crudest irreligion, does it leave 
men divorced from all communion with God. 

Such is the philosophy of Hinduism. It is Superman’s heaven and the 
common man’s damnation. 

I am conscious that my position regarding the philosophy of Hinduism 
will be assailed from different sides. So contrary it is to the current 
views about it that it is bound to be assailed. The attack may come 
from various sides. 

It will be said that I am wrong in taking the Manu Smriti as the book 
of Hindu religion and that the true gospel of Hinduism is contained in 
the Vedas and the Bhagwat Gita.. 

I am sure no orthodox Hindu will be bold enough to repudiate the 
authority of Manu Smriti as a book of Hindu Religion. Such a charge 
can be made only by some reformed sects of Hinduism such as the Arya 
Samajists. But there can be no doubt that this charge is not well founded. 
To refute this charge it is perhaps desirable to explain 1 how the Smritis 
obtained a place and position of authority among the Hindus. 

The Smritis originally were a collection of rules relating to social 
traditions, customs and conventions approved of and recommended by 
those who were learned in the Vedas. For a long time these rules existed 
only in the memory of those learned in the Vedas, so they began to be 
called Smritis i.e. things which are remembered in contrast to Vedas or 
Shruti that is things which were heard. In the beginning the Smritis 
even when they were codified were treated as rules of inferior value as 
compared with the rules contained in the Vedas. 

The difference in their authority and binding force was the result of 
the natural difference between the trustworthiness of what is heard as 
compared to what is only remembered. There was also another reason of 
this differentiation in the two sorts of Dharma Shastra literature. This 
was based upon the status of their authors. The authors of the Vedas 
were Rishis. The authors of the Smritis were only learned men. The 
Rishis were superior in status and sanctity than those who were merely 
learned. Consequently the Vedas were treated as more authoritative 
than the Smritis. 

The consequence arising from this was well expressed in the Hindu 
theological formula according to which if there was a conflict in the 
rules of two Vedas on the same subject it meant option for a rule of 

1 See the interesting article by Prof. Altekar on “The Position of Smritis as a Source of 
Dharma” in the Kane Memorial Volume pp. 18-25. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


79 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 79 

Vedas cannot be deemed to be inoperative. On the other hand, in a conflict 
between a rule of Shriti and a rule of Smriti the rule of Shruti prevailed 
becuse for the reasons stated above Smriti was inferior in authority to 
the Shruti. But as pointed out by Prof. Altekar, the Smritis in course 
of time came to be invested with the same authority as belonged to 
the Vedas. Various means were adopted to accomplish this purpose. In 
the first place the authors of the Smritis were elevated to the status of 
Rishis. The early Dharma Shastra writers like Gautama, and Baudhayana 
were never given the status of a Rishi. But Manu and Yajnavalkya are 
reckoned as Rishis. By this means the status of the Smritis was equated 
to that of the Shrutis. The second means adopted was to regard the 
Smriti as the record from memory of a Shruti which was lost. Thus 
Smriti instead of being regarded as something quite different from Shruti 
came to be regarded as akin to and indistinguishable from Shruti. The 
result of these steps was a complete change in the rules regarding the 
authority of the two. Originally if there was a conflict between a Smriti 
and a Shruti, the Shruti prevailed. The new rule was that in case of 
conflict there was an option which meant that the Smriti rule was as 
operative as the Rule of Shruti. This new rule has been expressly laid 
down by Kumarila in his commentary on the Purvamimansa Sutra 
whereby the Smritis were made as authoritative as Shrutis. 

While originally Hindu Society was bound to the Vedas and could not 
follow any rule which was contrary to the Vedas, the new rule altered 
the situation and left it to the option of society either to follow the 
Shruti or the Smriti. But even this option was later on taken away. 
This was done by making the study of the Smritis as compulsory as 
that of the Shruti. 

This was done gradually. In the first place it was suggested that 
the Shrutis and Smritis are the two eyes of the Brahamana, if he is 
devoid of one he becomes a one-eyed person. Then came the theory that 
Brahmanyam is possible only as the result of a joint study of both the 
Vedas and the Smritis. Finally came the rule according to which the 
study of the Smruti only was recognized and a contempt of the Smriti 
was made a sin and a person guilty of it was declared to be condemned 
to be born as a beast for 21 generations. 

This is how the Smritis have been recognized as a source of Hindu 
Religion and there is no doubt that, to quote Prof. Altekar, the Smritis; 

“have played a great part in determining the features of many a 
social and socio-religious institutions and customs and in moulding the 
development of modern Hinduism.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


80 


80 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

It cannot therefore be maintained that I was wrong in taking Manu 
Smriti as containing the philosophy of Hinduism. 

This work of elevating the Smritis to the status of the Vedas was 
undertaken by the Brahmins for a most selfish reason. The Smritis 
contain in all its wild and luxurious growth the doctrine of Caste, the 
doctrine of the superiority of the Brahmins, their rights and privileges, 
the doctrine of the subordination of the Kshatriyas and Vaishyas and the 
doctrine of the degradation of the Shudras. Such being the philosophy 
of the Smritis, the Brahmins were directly interested in investing the 
Smritis with the authority which was claimed for the Vedas and in 
which they ultimately succeeded to their advantage but to the ruination 
of the whole country. But conceding — which orthodox and pious Hindu 
would do — that the Smritis do not contain the philosophy of Hinduism 
but that the same is to be found in the Vedas and the Bhagwat Geeta 
the question is what difference would this make in the result. 

It seems to me that it matters very little whether one takes the 
Smritis, or the Vedas or the Bhagwat Geeta. 

Do the Vedas teach something which is fundmentally different from 
what the Smritis do? Does the Bhagwat Geeta run contrary to the 
injunctions of the Smritis. A few illustrations will make the matter clear. 

It is indisputable that the Vedas lay down the theory of Chaturvarna 
in what is known as the Purushasukta. This Purushasukta recognizes 
two basic principles. It recognizes the division of society into four sections 
as an ideal. It also recognizes that the ideal relationship between the 
four sections is inequality. 

What the Bhagwat Geeta teaches is also beyond controversy. Its 
teaching may be summarized in the following four pronouncements made 
by Krishna in the Bhagwat Geeta. 

(1) “I myself have created the arrangement known as Chaturvarna (i.e. 
the fourfold division of society into four castes Brahmins, Kshatriyas, 
Vaishyas and Shudras) assigning them different occupations in 
accordance with the native capacities. It is I who am the maker of this 
Chaturvarna”. — Gita. IV. 13 

(2) “Even if it may be easier to follow the occupation of another Varna 
yet to follow the occupation of one’s own Varna is more mertorious, 
although one may not be able to do it quite efficiently. There is bliss 
in following the occupation of one’s own Varna, even if death were to 
result in performing it; but to follow the occupation of another Varna 
is risky “. — Geeta. III. 35. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


81 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 81 

(3) “The educated should not unsettle the faith of the uneducated who 
have become attached to their occupation. He himself should perform 
the occupation of his Varna and make others perform their’s accordingly. 

An educated man may not become attached to his occupation. But the 
uneducated and dull-minded people who have become attached to their 
occupation should not be spoiled by the educated by putting them on 
a wrong path by abandoning their own occupation” — Geeta III. 26, 29. 

(4) “Oh, Arjun! Whenever this religion of duties and occupations (i.e. 
this religion of Chaturvarna) declines, then I myself will come to birth 
to punish those who are responsible for its downfall and to restore 
it — Geeta IV, 7-8. 

Such is the position of Geeta. What difference is there between it and 
the Manu Smriti ? Geeta is Manu in a nutshell. Those who run away 
from Manu Smriti and want to take refuge in Geeta either do not know 
Gita or are prepared to omit from their consideration that soul of Geeta 
which makes it akin to Manu Smriti. 

Compare the teachings of the Veda, of the Bhagwat Geeta with what 
is contained in the Manu Smriti which I have taken as the text for 
elucidating the philosophy of Hinduism. What difference does one find ? 
The only difference one can find is that the Vedas and the Bhagwat 
Geeta deal with General Theory while the Smritis are concerned in 
working out the particulars and details of that theory. But so far as 
the essence is concerned all of them — the Smritis, the Vedas and the 
Bhagwat Geeta — are woven on the same pattern, the same thread runs 
through them and are really parts of the same fabric. 

The reason for this is obvious. The Brahmins who were the authors 
of the whole body of Hindu Religious Literature — except the Upanishad 
Literature — took good care to inject the doctrines formulated by them 
in the Smritis, into the Vedas and the Bhagwat Geeta. Nothing is to 
be gained in picking and chosing between them. The Philosophy of 
Hinduism will be the same whether one takes the Manu Smriti as its 
Gospel or whether one takes the Vedas and the Bhagwat Geeta as the 
gospel of Hinduism. 

Secondly it will be contended that Manu Smriti is a Book of Laws 
and not a code of ethics and that what I have presented as a philosophy 
of Hinduism is only legal philosophy and is not the moral philosophy 
of Hinduism. 

My answer to this contention is simple. I hold that in Hinduism there 
is no distinction between legal philosophy and moral philosophy. That 
is because in Hinduism there is no distinction between the Legal and 
the Moral, the Legal being also the Moral. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


82 


82 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Not much evidence is necessary to support my contention. Take the 
meaning 1 of the word Dharma in the Rig Veda. The word Dharma 
occurs in the Rig Veda 58 times. It is used in six different senses. It 
is used to denote (I) Ancient custom, (2) Laws, (3) Any arrangement 
which maintains law and order in society, (4) The course of nature, (5) 
The quality of a substance and (6) Duty of good and evil. It will thus 
be seen that from the very beginning the word Dharma in Hinduism 
has a two fold connotation. It means both law and moral. That is one 
reason why in the philosophy of Hinduism there can be no distinction 
between legal philosophy and moral philosophy. 

This is not to say that the Hindus have no code of morality. To be 
sure they have. But it is very pertinent to ask the nature and character 
of conduct which the Hindu Code of Ethics declares to be moral. 

To have an idea of the nature of conduct which the Hindu thinks 
moral, it is better to begin by recognizing that there are three levels of 
conduct 2 which must be distinguished. (I) Conduct arising from instincts 
and fundamental needs (2) Conduct regulated by standards of society and 
(3) Conduct regulated by individual conscience. Conduct on the first level, 
we do not call moral conduct. It is of course not immoral; it is merely 
unmoral. It is governed by forces not as moral in purpose but as valuable 
in result. The forces are biological or sociological or psychological. These 
have purpose, such as to satisfy hunger, or to forge a weapon against an 
enemy. But the end is one set up by our physical or instinctive nature. 
So long as this is merely accepted as an inevitable end and not compared 
with others, valued, and chosen, it is not properly moral. Conduct on the 
second level is no doubt social. Wherever groups of men are living there 
are certain ways of acting which are common to the group — “folkways”. 
There are approved ways of acting, common to a group, and handed 
down from generation to generation. Such approved ways of acting are 
called the mores or the morals of the group. They imply the judgment 
of the group that they are to be followed. The welfare of the group is 
regarded as in some sense imbedded in them. It becomes the duty of 
the individual to follow them and if any one acts contrary to them he 
is made to feel the group’s disapproval. We cannot strictly speaking 
call the conduct moral. Because the end is accepted as a standard of 
‘good’ prescribed by society. If it had spoken of a moral conduct it is 
only because it conforms to the mores or morals of the Society. It may 
be called customary morality. Conduct on the third level is conduct 
which alone is truly and completely moral. That is because in it the 

1 What follows if taken from an article on the subject by Mr. Yeshwant Ramkrishna Date 
in a Marathi Magazine called “Swadhaya” Double No. 7-8. First year pp. 18-21. 

2 In this I am entirely following the analysis given by Crawley and Tufts in their volume 
on Ethics. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


83 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 83 

individual recognizes the right or chooses the good, and freely devotes himself 
heartily to its fulfilment. He does not merely accept what is inevitable or 
follow what is approved by society. He values and chooses the end and 
becomes personally responsible. His is reflective morality. 

On what level does Hindu morality stand ? Obviously it is not on the 
third level. This means that a Hindu is social but not moral in the strict 
sense of the term. A Hindu takes no responsibility for the ends he serves. 
He is a willing tool in the hands of his society, content to follow. He is not 
a free agent not afraid to differ. His notions of sin give remarkable proof 
of his unmoral character. Institutes of Vishnu gives a list of sins which are 
divided into nine classes: — 

1. Deadly sins — atipataka. These are certain forms of incest, to be atoned 
for only by burning. 

2. Great sins — mahapataka. These are killing a Brahman, drinking 
spirituous liquor, stealing the gold of a Brahman, connexion with a Guru’s 
wife; also social intercourse with those guilty of such sins. 

3. Minor sins of a similar character — anupataka. These include the killing 
of certain other classes of persons, giving false evidence and killing a friend, 
stealing lands or deposits of a Brahman, certain forms of incest and adultery. 

4. Minor sins — upapataka. Sins of false statement, neglect of certain 
religious duties, adultery, unlawful occupation, offences connected with 
marrying before an elder brother &c, not paying one’s debts to the Gods, 
and manes, atheism & c. 

5. Sins effecting loss of caste — jatibramsakara. Causing bodily pain to 
a Brahman, smelling things which should not be smelt, dishonest dealing, 
certain unnatural crimes. 

6. Sins which degrade to a mixed caste — samkarikarana. Killing domestic 
or wild animals. 

7. Sins which render one unworthy to receive alms — apatrikarana. Receiving 
presents and alms from despicable persons, trade, money — lending, lying, 
serving a Shudra. 

8. Sins causing defilment — malavaha. Killing birds, amphibious animals, 
and aquatic animals, worms and insects; eating nutmegs or other plants 
similar in their effects to intoxicating liquors. 

9. Miscellaneous sins — prakirnaka. Those not already mentioned. 

This list of sins is not exhaustive but it, is long enough and 
illustrative enough to give us the idea which underlies the Hindu 
notion of Sin. In the first place it connotes the fall of man from a 
prescribed form of conduct. In the second place it means to be defiled, 
to become unclean. This is the root meaning of the term Patak. It 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


84 


84 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

means Patana (falling away) and it means Asowcha (being rendered 
unclean). In either case sin according to Hindu notion is a desease of 
the soul. In the first sense it is merely breach of a rule of external 
conduct. In the other sense it is a defilement of the body to be cleaned 
and purified by both or by pilgrimage or by sacrificial offering. But it is 
never the spiritual defilement which is associated with the harbouring 
of evil thoughts and purposes. 

This shows the morality of the Hindu is purely social. This means 
that the level of his morality is purely traditional and customary. There 
are two evils of customary morality. In the first place there is no surety 
that it will always be charged with sincerity and purity of motive. For it 
is only when morality penetrates to the deepest springs of purpose and 
feeling in the individual that pretense will cease to find a place in human 
behaviour. In the second place customary morality is an anchor and a 
drag. It holds up the average man and holds back the man who forges 
ahead. Customary morality is only another name for moral stagnation. 
This is true of all cases where morality is only customary morality. 
But the customary morality of the Hindus has an evil feature which is 
peculiar to it. Customary morality is a matter of meritorious conduct. 
Ordinarily this meritorious conduct is something which is good from the 
general or public point of view. But among the Hinduism the meritorious 
conduct is not concerned with the worship of God or the general good 
of community. Meritorious conduct in Hinduism is concerned with the 
giving of presents, of good and of honour to the Brahmins. Hindu Ethics 
is worship of the superman. 

What difference would it have made if I had taken Hindu Ethics as 
the basis for deducing the philosophy of Hinduism ? Most students of 
Hinduism forget that just as in Hinduism there is no difference between 
law and Religion so there is no difference between law and ethics. Both 
are concerned with the same thing namely regulating the conduct of the 
low class Hindus to subserve the ends of high Caste Hindus. 

Thirdly it will be objected that I presented an altogether false picture 
of Hinduism in as much as I have omitted to take into account the 
Upanishads which are the true source of Hindu philosophy. 

I admit that I have not taken the Upanishads into account. But I have 
a reason and I believe very good reason for doing so. I am concerned 
with the philosophy of Hinduism as a part of the philosophy of Religion. 
I am not concerned with Hindu philosophy. If I was, it would have been 
necessary to examine the Upanishads. But I am quite willing to deal with 
it so as to leave no doubt that what I have shown to be the philosophy 
of Hinduism is the philosophy of Upanishads. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


85 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 85 

The philosophy of the Upanishads can be stated in very few 
words. It has been well summarized by Huxley 1 when he says that 
the Upanishd philosophy agreed: — 

“In supposing the existence of a permanent reality, or ‘substance’, 
beneath the shifting series of phenomena, whether of matter or of 
mind. The substance of the cosmos was’ Brahma’, that of the individual 
man ‘Atman’; and the latter was separated from the former only, if I 
may so speak, by its phenomenal envelope, by the casing of sensations, 
thoughts and desires, pleasures and pains, which make up the illusive 
phantasmagoria of life. This the ignorant, take for reality; their ‘Atman’ 
therefore remains eternally imprisoned in delusions, bound by the 
fetters of desire and scourged by the whip of misery. 

Of what use is this philosophy of the Upanishadas ? The 
philosophy of the Upanishadas meant withdrawal from the struggle 
for existence by resort to asceticism and a destruction of desire by 
self mortification. 

As a way of life it was condemned by Huxley 2 in scathing terms: — 

“No more thorough mortification of the flesh has ever been attempted 
than that achieved by the Indian ascetic anchorite; no later monachism 
has so nearly succeeded in reducing the human mind to that condition 
of impassive quasi-somnambulism, which, but for its acknowledged 
holiness, might run the risk of being confounded with idiocy.” But 
the condemanation of the philosophy of the Upanishads is nothing as 
compared to the denunciation of the same by Lala Hardyal 3 : — 

“The Upanishads claim to expound ‘that, by knowing which 
everything is known’. This quest for ‘the absolute’ is the basis of 
all the spurious metaphysics of India. The treatises are full of 
absurd conceits, quaint fancies, and chaotic speculations. And we 
have not learned that they are worthless. We keep moving in the 
old rut; we edit and re-edit the old books instead of translating the 
classics of European social thought. What could Europe be if Frederic 
Harrison, Brieux, Bebel, Anatole France, Herve, Haekel, Giddings, 
and Marshall should employ their time in composing treatises on 
Duns, Scotus and Thomas Aquinas, and discussing the merits of the 
laws of the Pentateuch and the poetry of Beowulf ? Indian pundits 
and graduates seem to suffer from a kind of mania for what is effete 
and antiquated. Thus an institution, established by progressive men, 
aims at leading our youths through Sanskrit grammar to the Vadas 

1 Evolution and Ethics, p. 63. 

2 Evolution and Ethics p. 64 

3 Modern Review. July. 1912. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


86 


86 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

via the Six Darshanas! What a false move in the quest for wisdom! 

It is as if a caravan should travel across the desert to the shores of 
the Dead Sea in search of fresh water! Young men of India, look not 
for wisdom in the musty parchments of your metaphysical treatises. 
There is nothing but an endless round of verbal jugglary there. Read 
Rousseau and Voltaire, Plato and Aristotle, Haeckel and Spencer, Marx 
and Tolstoi, Ruskin and Comte, and other European thinkers, if you 
wish to understand life and its problems.” 

But denunciations apart, did the Upanishad philosophy have any 
influence on Hinduism as a social and political system? There is no doubt 
that it turned out to be most ineffective and inconsequential piece of 
speculation with no effect on the moral and social order of the Hindus. 

It may not be out of place to inquire into the reasons for this unfortunate 
result. One reason is obvious. The philosophy of Upanishad remained 
incomplete and therefore did not yield the fruit which it ought to have 
done. This will be quite clear if one asks what is the key-note of the 
Upanishads. In the words of Prof. Max Muller 1 the key note of the 
Upanishads is ‘Know thy Self’. The ‘Know thy Self of the Upanishads, 
means, know thy true Self, that which underlies thine ego and find it 
and know it in the highest, the eternal self, the One without a Second, 
which underlies the whole world.” 

That Atman and Brahman were one was the truth, the great truth 
which the Upanishads said they had discovered and they asked man to 
know this truth. Now the reasons why the philosophy of Upanishads, 
became ineffective are many. I will discuss them elsewhere. At this 
place I will mention only one. The philosophers of Upanishads did not 
realize that to know truth was not enough. One must learn to love 
truth. The difference between philosophy and religion may be put in two 
ways. Philosophy is concerned with knowing truth. Religion is concerned 
with the love of truth. Philosophy is static. Religion is dynamic. These 
differences are merely two aspects of one and the same thing. Philosophy 
is. static because it is concerned only with knowing truth. Religion is 
dynamic beause it is concerned with love of truth. As has been well said 
by Max Plowman 2 : — 

“ Unless religion is dynamic and begets in us the emotion of 

love for something, then it is better to be without any thing that 
we can call religion; for religion is perception of truth and if our 
perception of truth is not accompanied by our love for it then it 
were better not seen at all; The Devil himself is one who has seen 

1 Hibbert lectures 1878. p. 317. 

2 “The Nemesis of Ineffectual Religion” — Adelphi, January 1941. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


87 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 87 

the truth only to hate it. Tennyson said “We must love the highest 
when we see it”. It does not follow. Seen in pure objectivity the highest 
repels by its difference and distance; what we fear it, and what we fear 
we come to hate ” 

This is the fate of all treanscendal philosophies. They have no influence 
on the way of life. As Blake said “ Religion is politics and politics is 
Brotherhood. Philosophy must become Religion that is it must become a 
Working Ethic. It must not remain mere metaphysics. As Mr. Plowman 
says — 

“If religion were a Metaphysic and nothing else, one thing is certain, 
it would never be the concern of the simple and humble men. 

“To keep it wholly in the realm of Metaphysic is to make nonsense 
of it. For belief in religion as in something not directly and vitally 
effective of politics is ultimately belief that is strictly speaking idiotic; 
because in the effective sense such a belief makes no difference, and in 
the world of time and space what ‘makes no difference’ does not exist.” 

It is for these very reasons that the philosophy of the Upanishads 
proved so ineffective. 

It is therefore incontrovertible that notwithstanding the Hindu Code 
of Ethics, notwithstanding the philosophy of the Upanishads not a little 
not a jot did abate from the philosophy of Hinduism as propounded by 
Manu. They were ineffective and powerless to eraze the infamy preached 
by Manu in the name of religion. Notwithstanding their existence one 
can still say 

“Hinduism! Thy name is inequality!” 

V 

Inequality is the soul of Hinduism. The morality of Hinduism is only 
social. It is unmoral and unhuman to say the least. What is unmoral 
and unhuman easily becomes immoral, inhuman and infamous. This 
is what Hinduism has become. Those who doubt this or deny this 
proposition should examine the social composition of the Hindu Society 
and ponder over the condition of some of the elements in it. Take the 
following cases. 

First as to the Primitive Tribes. In what state of civilization are they ? 

The history of human civilization includes the entire period of 
human progress from Savagery to Barbarism and from Barbarism 
to Civilization. The transition from one to other has been marked by 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


88 


88 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

some discovery or intention in some department of knowledge of Art 
resulting in advancing the onward march of man. 

The development of articulate speech was the first thing which, from the 
point of view of human progress, divided man from the brute. It marks the 
first stage of savagery. The Middle period of the state of savagery began 
with the knowledge of the manufacture and use of fire. This wonderful 
discovery enabled man to extend his habit almost indefinitely. He could 
leave his forest home, go to different and colder climates, and increase 
his food supply by including flesh and fish. The next discovery was the 
Bow and Arrow. This was the greatest achievement of primitive man 
and marks the highest state of savage man. It was indeed a wonderful 
implement. The possesor of this device could bring down the fleetest 
animal and could defend himself against the most predatory. 

The transition from Savagery to Barbarism was marked by the 
discovery of pottery. Hitherto man had no utensils that could withstand 
the action of fire. Without utensils man could not store nor could he 
cook. Undoubtedly pottery was a great civilizing influence. 

The Middle state of Barbarism began when man learned to domesticate 
wild animals. Man learned that captive animals could be of service to 
him. Man now became a herdsman, no longer dependent for food upon 
the precarious chase of wild animals. Milk procurable at all seasons 
made a highly important addition to his dietary. With the aid of horse 
and camel he traversed wide areas hitherto impassable. The captive 
animals became aids to commerce which resulted in the dissemination 
of commodities as well as of ideas. 

The next discovery was of the Art of smelting iron. This marks the 
highest stage of advancement of Barbaric man. With this discovery man 
became a “tool-making animal” who with his tool could fashion wood and 
stone and build houses and bridges. 

This marks the close of the advancement made by Barbaric man. 

The dividing line which marks off Barbaric people from Civilized 
people, in the fullest sense of the word Civilization, is the art of making 
ideas tangible by means of graphic signs — which is called the art of 
writing. With this man conquered time as he had with the earlier 
inventions conquered space. He could now record his deeds and his 
thoughts. Henceforth, his knowledge, his poetical dreams, his moral 
aspirations might be recorded in such form as to be read not merely by 
his contemporaries but by successive generations of remote posterity. 
For man his history became safe and secure. This was the steepest 
assent and the climbing of it marks the beginnings of civilization. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


89 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 89 

Stopping here for the moment let us ask in what state of civilization 
arc the Primitive Tribes. 

The name Primitive Tribes 1 is expressive of the present state of 
people who are called by that name. They live in small scattered 
huts in forests. They live on wild fruits, nuts and roots. Fishing and 
hunting are also resorted to for the purpose of securing food. Agriculture 
plays a very small part in their social economy. Food supplies being 
extremely precarious, they lead a life of semi- starvation from which 
there is no escape. As to clothes they economize them to a vanishing 
point. They move almost in a state of complete nakedness. There is a 
tribe which is known as “Bonda Porajas” which means “Naked Porajas”. 
Of these people it is said that the women wear a very narrow strip 
which serves as a petticoat almost identical with what is worn by the 
Momjak Nagas in Assam, the ends hardly meeting at the top on the 
left thigh. These petticoats are woven at home out of the fibre of a 
forest tree. Girls wear a fillet of beads and of palmyra leaf and an 
enormous quantity of beads and neck ornaments extremely like those 
worn by many Komjak women. Otherwise the women wear nothing. 

The women shave their heads entirely Of these Chenchus, a tribe 

residing near Farhabad in the Nizam’s Dominions it is said that” their 
houses are conical, rather slight in structure made of bamboos sloping 

to the central point and covered with a thinnish layer of thatch 

They have very little, indeed, in the way of material effects, the scanty 
clothes they wear, consisting of a langoti and a cloth in the case of 
men, and a short bodice and a petticoat in the case of women, being 
practically all, besides a few cooking pots and a basket or two which 
perhaps sometimes contains grain. They keep cattle and goats and 
in this particular village do a little cultivation, elsewhere subsisting 
on honey and forest produce which they sell”. Regarding the Morias, 
another Primitive tribe, it is stated the men generally wear a single 
cloth round the waist with a slap coming down in the front. They also 
have a necklace of beads and when they dance put on cock’s plumes and 
peacock’s feathers in their turbans. Many girls are profusely tattooed, 
especially on their faces, and some of them on their legs as well. The 
type of tattooing is said to be according to the taste of the individual 
and it is done with thorns and needles. In their hair many of them 
stick the feathers of jungle cocks and their heads are also adorned with 
combs of wood and tin and brass. 

These Primitive Tribes have no hesitation about eating anyting, even 
worms and insects, and, in fact, there is very little meat that they will 

1 This and other information is taken from Census of India 1931 Vol. I part 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


90 


90 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

not eat, whether the animal has died a natural death or has been killed 
four days or more before by a tiger. 

The next group of the people he will come accross are the Criminal 
Tribes. 

The Criminal Tribes live not in Forests as the Primitive Tribes do but 
in the plains in close proximity to, and often in the midst of civilized life. 
Hollius in his “Criminal Tribes of the United Provinces” gives an account 
of their activities. They live entirely by crime. A few may be ostensibly 
engaged in agriculture, but this is only to cover up their real activities. 
Their nefarious practices find largest scope in dacoity or robbery by 
violence, but being a community organized for crime, nothing comes amiss 
to them. On deciding to commit a dacoity in any particular locality spies 
are sent out to select a suitable victim, study the general habits of the 
villagers, and the distance from any effective aid, and ennumerate the 
number of men and firearms. The raid usually takes place at midnight. 
Acting on the information given by the spies, men are posted at various 
points in the village and by firing off their guns attract attention from 
the main gang which attacks the particular house or houses previously 
appointed. The gang usually consists of 30 to 40 men. 

It is essential to emphasize the great part played by crime in the general 
life of these peoples. A boy is initiated into crime as soon as he is able 
to walk and talk. No doubt the motive is practical, to a great extent, in 
so far as it is always better to risk a child in petty theft, who, if he is 
caught, would probably be cuffed, while an adult would immediately be 
arrested. An important part is also played by women, who, although they 
do not participate in the actual raids, have many heavy responsibilities. 
Besides being clever in disposing off stolen property the women of the 
Criminal Tribes are experts in shop lifting. 

At one time the Criminal Tribes included such well organized 
Confederacies of Professional Criminals as the Pindharies and the Thugs. 

The Pindharies were a predatory body of armed gangsters. Their 
organization was an open military organization of freebooters who 
could muster 20000 fine horse and even more. They were under 
the command of brigand chiefs. Chitu one of the most powerful 
commanders had under his single command 10000 horse, including 
5000 good cavalry, besides infantry and guns. The Pindharies had 
no military projects for employing their loose bands of irregular 
soldiery, which developed into bodies of professional plunderers. The 
Pindharies aimed at no conquests. Their object was to secure booty 
and cash for themselves. General loot and rapine was their occupation. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


91 


PHILOSOPHY OF HINDUISM 91 

They recognized no rulers. They were subjects of none. They rendered 
loyalty to none. They respected none, and plundered, all, high and low, 
rich and poor, without fear or compunction. 

The Thugs 1 were a well organized body of professional assassins, who, 
in gangs of from 10 to 100 wandered in various guises throughout India, 
worked themselves into the confidence of wayfarers of the wealthier 
class, and, when a favourable opportunity occurred, strangled them by 
throwing a handkerchief or noose round their necks, and then plundered 
and buried them. All this was done according to certain ancient and 
rigidly prescribed forms and after the performance of special religious 
rites, in which was the consecration of the package, and the sacrifice 
of sugar. They were staunch worshippers of Kali, the Hindu Goddess of 
destruction. Assassination for gain was with them a religious duty, and 
was considered a holy and honourable profession. They had, in fact, no 
idea of doing wrong, and their moral feelings did not come into play. The 
will of the Goddess, by whose command and in whose honour they followed 
their calling, was revealed to them through a very complicated system 
of omens. In obedience to these they often travelled even the distance 
of hundred miles in company with, or in the wake of, their intended 
victims before a safe opportunity had presented itself for executing their 
design; and when the deed was done, rites were performed in honour 
of that tutelary deity, and a goodly portion of the spoil was set apart 
for her. The Thugs had also a jargon of their own, as well as certain 
signs by which its members recognized each other in the remotest part 
of India. Even those who from age or infirmities could no longer take 
an active part in the operations, used to aid the cause as watchmen, 
spies or dressers of food. It was owing to their thorough organization, 
the secrecy and security with which they went to work, but chiefly to 
the religious garb in which they shrouded their murders, that they could 
continue for centuries to practise their craft. The extraordinary fact was 
that Thugee was regarded as a regular profession by Indian Rulers of 
the day, both Hindu and Mahomedans. The Thugs paid taxes to the 
state and the state left them unmolested. 

It was not until the British became rulers of the country that an 
attempt was made to suppress the Thugs. By 1835, 382 Thugs were 
hanged and 986 were transported or imprisoned for life. Even as late 
as 1879 the number of registered Thugs was 344 and the Thugee 
and the Dacoity department of the Government of India continued to 
exist until 1904 when its place was taken by the Central Criminal 
Intelligence Department. While it is not possible for the criminal 


Encyclopedia Britannica. 11th Ed. Vol. XXVI p. 896. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


92 


92 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

tribes to live by organized bodies of criminals, crime continues to be 
their main occupation. 

Besides these two classes there is a third class which comprizes a 
body of people who are known as Untouchables. 

Below the Untouchables there are others who are known as 
Unapproachables. Untouchables are those who cause pollution only if 
they touch. The Unapproachables are those who cause pollution if they 
come within a certain distance. It is said of the Nayadis — a people who 
fall into the category of the Unapproachables, “that they are the lowest 
caste among the Hindus — the dog-eaters. They are the most persistent 
in their clamour for charity, and will follow at a respectful distance, 
for miles together any person walking, driving or boating. If any thing 
is given to them, it must be laid down, and after the person offering it 
has proceeded a sufficient distance, the receipient comes timidly forward, 
and removes it.” Of the same people Mr. Thurston says, “The subject 
(i.e. the Nayadis) whom I examined and measured at Shoranus, though 
living only about three miles off, had, by reason of the pollution which 
they traditionally carry with them to avoid walking over the long bridge 
which spans the river, and follow a circuitous route of many miles” 

Below the Unapproachables are the Unseeables. 

In the Tinnevelley District of the Madras Presidency there is a class 
of unseeables called Purada Vannans. Of them it is said,” that they are 
not allowed to come out during day time because their sight is enough 
to cause pollution. These unfortunate people are ‘compelled’ to follow 
the nocturnal habits, leaving their dens after dark and scuttling home 
at the false dawn like the badger, the hyena, the avordvark.” 

Consider the total population of these classes. The Primitive Tribes 
form a total of 25 million souls. The Criminal Tribes number 414 millions 
and the Untouchables number 50 millions. This makes a grand total of 
7914 millions. Now ask how these people could have remained in the 
state of moral, material, social and spiritual degradation surrounded 
as they have been by Hinduism. Hindus say that their civilization is 
older than any civilization, that Hinduism as a religion is superior to 
any other religion. If this is so how is that Hinduism failed to elevate 
these people, bring them enlightenment and hope; how is it that it failed 
even to reclaim them; how is it that it stood with folded hands when 
millions and millions were taking to life to shame and crime ? What is 
the answer to this. The only answer is that Hinduism is overwhelmed 
with the fear of pollution. It has not got the power to purify. It has 
not the impulse to serve and that is because by its very nature it is 
unhuman and unmoral. It is a misnomer to call it religion. Its philosophy 
is opposed to very thing for which religion stands. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


93 


PART II 


India and 

The Pre-requisites 

of Communism 


We are reproducing here the text of Chapter 
One and Two of ‘The Hindu Social Order’. 
This Chapter seems to be a part of the book 
entitled ‘India and Communism’. From the 
contents on the first page of the typed script, 
we find that Dr. Ambedkar had divided the 
whole book “India and Communism” into 
three parts. The first part was captioned as 
‘The Prerequisites of Communism’. This part 
was to have three Chapters but we could not 
find any of these Chapters in Dr. Ambedkar’s 
papers. So far as the part Two is concerned 
which is titled “India and the Pre-requisites 
of Communism”, only Chapter Four entitled, 
“Hindu Social Order” has been found in a 
well bound register. This Chapter has two 
sub-titles as follows :— 

I — Hindu Social Order: Its Essential 
Principles, and II — The Hindu Social Order: 
Its Unique Features. No other chapters on the 
subjects mentioned in the table of contents 
of this book were found. In all, there are 63 
foolscap typed pages. — Editors. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\vol3-02.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


94 


Blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


95 


CHAPTER 2 

The Hindu Social Order: 

Its Essential Principles 

i 

What is the character of the Hindu Social Order? Is it a free social 
order? To answer this question, some idea of what constitutes a free social 
order is necessary. Fortunately, the matter is not one of controversy. 
Since the days of the French Revolution there is no difference as to 
the essentials of a free social order. There may be more but two are 
fundamental. Generally speaking, they are two. The first is that the 
individual is an end in himself and that the aim and object of society 
is the growth of the individual and the development of his personality. 
Society is not above the individual and if the individual has to subordinate 
himself to society, it is because such subordination is for his betterment 
and only to the extent necessary. 

The second essential is that the terms of associated life between 
members of society must be regarded by consideration founded on liberty, 
equality and fraternity. 

Why are these two essentials fundamental to a free social order? 

Why must the individual be the end and not the means of all social 
purposes? For an answer to this question, it is necessary to realise what 
we precisely mean when we speak of the human person. Why should 
we sacrifice our most precious possessions and our lives to defend the 
rights of the human person? No better answer to this question can be 
found than what is given by Prof. Jacques Maritain. As Prof. Maritain 
in his essay on ‘The Conquest of Freedom ’ 1 says: — 

“What do we mean precisely when we speak of the human person? 
When we say that a man is a person, we do not mean merely that 
he is an individual, in the sense that an atom, a blade of grass, 
a fly, or an elephant is an individual. Man is an individual who 
holds himself in hand by his intelligence and his will; he exists 
not merely in a physical fashion. He has spiritual super-existence 
through knowledge and love, so that he is, in a way, a universe in 

1 Freedom — Its Meaning by Ruth Nanda Kishen. p. 214. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


96 


96 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

himself, a microcomos, in which the great universe in its entirety 
can be encompassed through knowledge. By love he can give himself 
completely to beings who are to him, as it were, other selves. For this 
relation no equivalent can be found in the physical world. The human 
person possesses these characteristics because in the last analysis 
man, this flesh and these perishable bones which are animated and 
activated by a divine fire, exists ‘from the womb to the grave’ by 
virtue of the existence itself of his soul, which dominates time and 
death. Spirit is the root of personality. The notion of personality 
thus involves that of totality and independence, no matter how 
poor and crushed a person may be, he is a whole, and as a person 
suhsistent in an independent manner. To say that a man is a person 
is to say that in the depth of his being he is more a whole than a 
part and more independent than servile. It is to say that he is a 
minute fragment of matter that is at the same time a universe, a 
beggar who participates in the absolute being, mortal flesh whose 
value is external and a bit of straw-into which heaven enters. It is 
this metaphysical mystery that religious thought designates when it 
says that the person is the image of God. The value of the person, 
his dignity and rights, belong to the order of things naturally sacred 
which bear the imprint of the Father of Being, and which have in 
him the end of their movement.” 

Why is Equality essential ? The best exposition of the subject is 
by Prof. Beard in his essay on ‘Freedom in Political Thought’ and 
I shall do no more than quote him. Says Prof. Beard 1 : 

“The term ‘Equality’ is unfortunate, but no other word can 
be found as a substitute. Equality means ‘exactly the same or 
equivalent in measure, amount, number, degree, value, or quality’. 

It is a term exact enough in physics and mathematics, but ovbiously 
inexact when applied to human beings. What is meant by writers 
who have gone deepest into the subject is that human beings 
possess, in degree and kind, fundamental characteristics that are 
common to humanity. These writers hold that when humanity is 
stripped of extrinsic goods and conventions incidental to time and 
place, it reveals essential characteristics so widely distributed as 
to partake of universality. Whether these characteristics be called 
primordial qualities, biological necessities, residues or any other 
name matters little. No one can truthfully deny that they do exist. 

It is easy to point out inequalities in physical strength, in artistic 
skill, in material wealth, or in mental capacity, but this too is a 
matter of emphasis. At the end it remains a fact that fundamental 


Freedom — Its Meaning — pp. 11-13. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


97 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLES 97 

characteristics appear in all human beings. Their nature and 
manifestations are summed up in the phrase ‘moral equality’. 

Emphasis must he placed on the term ‘moral’. From time immemorial 
it has been the fashion of critics to point out the obvious facts that in 
physical strength, talents, and wealth, human beings are not equal. 
The criticism is both gratuitous and irrelevant. No rational exponent of 
moral equality has even disputed the existence of obvious inequalities 
among human beings, even when he has pointed out inequalities 
which may be ascribed to tyranny or institutional prescriptions. The 
Declaration of Independence does not assert that all men are equal; 
it proclaims that they are ‘created’ equal. 

In essence the phrase ‘moral equality’ asserts in ethical value, a 
belief to be sustained, and recognition of rights to be respected. Its 
validity cannot be demonstrated as a problem in mathematics can be 
demonstrated. It is asserted against inequalities in physical strength, 
talents, industry, and wealth. It denied that superior physical strength 
has a moral right to kill, eat, or oppress human beings merely because 
it is superior. To talents and wealth, the ideal of moral equality makes 
a similar denial of right. And indeed few can imagine themselves to 
have superior physical strength, talents and wealth will withhold 
from inferiors all moral rights. In such circumstances government 
and wealth would go to superior physical strength; while virtue and 
talents would serve the brute man, as accomplished Greek slaves 
served the whims, passions and desires to Roman conquerors. When 
the last bitter word of criticism has been uttered against the ideal 
of moral equality, there remains something in it which all, except 
things, must accept and in practice do accept, despite their sheers 
and protests. A society without any respect for human personalities 
is a band of robbers.” 

Why is Fraternity essential? 

Fraternity is the name for the disposition of an individual to 
treat men as the object of reverence and love and the desire to be 
in unity with his fellow beings. This statement is well expressed 
by Paul when he said ‘Of one blood are all nations of men, There 
is neither Jew nor Greek, neither bond nor free, neither male 
nor female; for yet are all one in Christ Jesus.’ Equally well 
was it expressed when the Pilgrim Fathers on their landing at 
Plymouth said: “We are knit together as a body in the most sacred 

covenant of the Lord by virtue of which we hold ourselves 

tied to all care of each others’ good and of the whole.” These 
sentiments are of the essence of fraternity. Fraternity strengthens 
socialties and gives to each individual a stronger personal 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


98 


98 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

interest in practically consulting the welfare of others. It leads him to 
identify his feelings more and more with their good, or at least with an 
even greater degree of practical consideration for it. With a disposition 
to fraternity he comes as though instructively to be conscious of himself 
as being one who of course pays a regard to others. The good of others 
becomes to him a thing naturally and necessarily to be attended to like 
any of the physical conditions of our existence. Where people do not 
feel that entireness of sympathy with all others, concordance in the 
general direction of their conduct is impossible. For a person in whom 
social feeling is not developed cannot but bring himself to think of the 
rest of his fellow-beings as rivals struggling with him for the means 
of happiness when he must endeavour to defeat in order that he may 
succeed in himself. 

What is Liberty and why is it essential in a free social order? 

Liberty falls under two classes. There is civil liberty and there is 
political liberty. Civil liberty refers to (I) liberty of movement which is 
another name for freedom from arrest without due process of law (2) 
liberty of speech (which of course includes liberty of thought, liberty of 
reading, writing and discussion) and (3) liberty of action. 

The first kind of liberty is of course fundamental. Not only fundamental 
it is also most essential. About its value, there can be no manner of 
doubt. The second kind of liberty which may be called freedom of opinion 
is important for many reasons. It is a necessary condition of all progress 
intellectual, moral, political and social. Where it does not exist the status 
quo becomes stereotyped and all originality even the most necessary is 
discouraged. Liberty of action means doing what one likes to do. It is 
not enough that liberty of action should be formal. It must be real. So 
understood, liberty of action means effective power to do specific things. 
There is no freedom where there are no means of taking advantage of it. 
Real liberty of action exists only where exploitation has been annihilated, 
where no suppression of one class by another exists, where there is no 
unemployment, no poverty and where a person is free from the fear of 
losing his job, his home and his food as a consequence of his action. 

Political liberty consists in the right of the invidual to share in the 
framing of laws and in the making and unmaking of governments. 
Governments are instituted for securing to men certain unalienable 
rights such as life, liberty and pursuit of happiness. Government must, 
therefore, derive its powers from those whose rights it is charged with 
the duty to protect. This is what is meant when it is said that the 
existence, power and authority of the Government must be derived 
from the consent of the governed. Political liberty is really a deduction 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


99 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLES 99 

from the principle of human personality and equality. For it implies 
that all political authority is derived from the people that the people 
are capable of directing and controlling their public as well as private 
lives to ends determined by themselves and by none else. 

These two tenets of a free social order are integrally connected. 
They are inseverable. Once the first tenet is admitted, the second tenet 
automatically follows. Once the sacredness of human personality is 
admitted the necessity of liberty, equality and fraternity must also be 
admitted as the proper climate for the development of personality. 

II 

How far does the Hindu social order recognise these tenets ? The 
inquiry is necessary. For it is only in so far as it recognizes these tenets 
that it will have the title to be called a free social order. 

Does the Hindu social order recognise the individual? Does it recognise 
his distinctiveness his moral responsibility ? Does it recognise him as an 
end in himself, as a subject not merely of disabilities but also of rights 
even against the State ? As a starting point for the discussion of the 
subject one may begin by referring to the words of the exodus where 
Jehova says to Ezekiel: — 

“Behold! all souls are mine; as the soul of the Father, so also the 

soul of the son is mine; the soul that sinneth, it shall die the son 

shall not bear the iniquity of the Father, neither shall the father bear 
the iniquity of the son; the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon 
him, and the wickedness of the wicked upon him.” 

Here is emphasized the distinctiveness of the individual and his moral 
responsibility. The Hindu social order does not recognise the individual as 
a centre of social purpose. For the Hindu social order is based primarily 
on class or Varna and not on individuals. Originally and formally the 
Hindu social order recognized four classes: (1) Brahmins, (2) Kshatriyas (3) 
Vaishyas and (4) Shudras. Today it consists of five classes, the fifth being 
called the Panchamas or Untouchables. The unit of Hindu society is not the 
individual Brahmin or the individual Kshatriya or the individual Vaishya 
or the individual Shudra or the individual Panchama. Even the family is 
not regarded by the Hindu social order as the unit of society except for 
the purposes of marriage and inheritance. The unit of Hindu society is the 
class or Varna to use the Hindu technical name for class. In the Hindu 
social order, there is no room for individual merit and no consideration 
of individual justice. If the individual has a privilege it is not because it 
is due to him personally. The privilege goes with the class, and if he is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


100 


100 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

found to enjoy it, it is because he belongs to that class. Contrawise, 
if an individual is suffering from a wrong, it is not because he by his 
conduct deserves it. The disability is the disability imposed upon the 
class and if he s found to be labouring under it, it is because he belongs 
to that class. 

Does the Hindu social order recognize fraternity ? The Hindus like the 
Christians and the Muslims do believe that men are created by God. 
But while the Christians and the Muslims accept this as the whole 
truth the Hindus believe that this is only part of the truth. According 
to them, the whole truth consists of two parts. The first part is that 
men are created by God. The second part is that God created different 
men from different parts of his divine body. The Hindus regard the 
second part as more important and more fundamental than the first. 

The Hindu social order is based on the doctrine that men are created 
from the different parts of the divinity and therefore the view expressed 
by Paul or the Pilgrim Fathers has no place in it. The Brahmin is no 
brother to the Kshatriya because the former is born from the mouth 
of the divinity while the latter is from the arms. The Kshatriya is no 
brother to the Vaishya because the former is born from the arms and 
the latter from his thighs. As no one is a brother to the. other, no one 
is the keeper of the other. 

The doctrine that the different classes were created from different 
parts of the Divine body has generated the belief that it must be divine 
will that they should remain separate and distinct. It is this belief which 
has created in the Hindu an instinct to be different, to be separate and 
to be distinct from the rest of his fellow Hindus. Compare the following 
rules in the Manu Smriti regarding the Upanayan or the Investiture of 
a body with the sacred thread: — 

II. 36. “In the eighth year after conception, one should perform the 
initiation (Upanayan) of a Brahmani in the eleventh after conception 
(that) of a Kshatriya but in the twelfth that of a Vaishya.” 

II. 41. “Let students according to the order (of their castes), wear (as 
upper dressed) the skins of black antelope, spotted deer, and he-goats 
and (lower garments) made of hemp, flex or wool.” 

II. 42. “The girdle of a Brahmana shall consist of a triple cord of 
Munga grass, smooth and soft (that) of a Kshatriya, of a bowstring, 
made of Murva fibres (that) of a Vaishya of hempen threads. 

II. 43. “If Munga grass (and soforth) be not procurable, (the 
girdles) may be made of kusa, Asmantaka, and Balbaga (fibres) with 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


101 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLES 101 

a single threefold knot, or with three or five (knots according to the 
custom of the family.” 

II. 44. “The sacrificial string of a Brahmana shall be made of cotton 
(shall be) twisted to the right, (and consist) of three threads, that of a 
Kshatriya of hempen threads, and that of a Vaishya of woolen threads. 

II. 45. “A Brahamana shall carry according to sacred law a staff 
of Bilva or Palasa, a Kshatriya of Vata or Khadira; and a Vaishya 
of Pillu or Udumbara.” 

II. 46. “The staff of a Brahmana shall be made of such length as to 
reach the end of his hair; that of a Kshatriya to reach his forehead; 
and that of a Vaishya to reach the tip of his nose.” 

II. 48. “Having taken a staff according to his choice having 
worshipped the Sun and walked round the fire, turning his right hand 
towards it (the student) should beg alms according to the prescribed 
rule.” 

II. 49. “An initiated Brahmana should beg, beginning his request 
with the word lady (bhavati); a Kshatriya placing the word lady in 
the middle, but a Vaishya placing it at the end of the formula.” 

On reading this one may well ask the reasons for such distinctions. 
The above rules refer to students or what are called Bramhacharia 
ready to enter upon the study of the Vedas. Why should there be 
these distinctions ? Why should the ages of Upanayana of the Brahmin 
boy differ from that of the Kshatriya or Vaishya? Why should their 
garments be of different kind ? Why should their materials of girdle 
cords be different? Why should the material of strings be different? 
Why should their staves be of different trees ? Why should their staves 
differ in length? Why in uttering the formula for asking alms they 
should place the word ‘Bhavathi’ in different places? These differences 
are not necesary nor advantageous. The only answer is that they are 
the result of the Hindu instinct to be different from his fellow which 
has resulted from the belief of people being innately different owing 
to their being created from different parts of the divine body. 

It is also the Hindu instinct due to the same belief never to overlook 
a difference if it does exist but to emphasize it, recognize it and to 
blazen it forth. If there is caste its existence must be signalized by a 
distinguishing head-dress and by a distinguishing name. If there is a 
sect it must have its headmark. There are 92 sects in India. Each has 
a separate mark of itself. To invent 92 marks each one different from 
the other is a colossal business. The very impossibility of it would have 
made the most ingenious person to give up the task. Yet, the Hindus 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


102 


102 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

have accomplished it as may be seen from the pictorial representation 
of these marks given by Moore in his Hindu Pantheon. 

The most extensive and wild mainfestation of this spirit of isolation 
and separation is of course the caste-system. It is understandable that 
caste in a single number cannot exist. Caste can exist only in plural 
number. There can be castes. But there cannot be such a thing as a caste. 
But granting that theoretically castes must exist, in plural number how 
many castes should there be? Originally, there were four only. Today, 
how many are there? It is estimated that the total is not less than 
2000. It might be 3000. This is not the only staggering aspect of this 
fact. There are others. Castes are divided into sub-castes. Their number 
is legion. The total population of the Brahmin castes is about a crore 
and a half. But there are 1886 sub-castes of Brahmin caste !! In the 
Punjab alone, the Saraswat Brahmans are divided into 469 sub-castes. 
The Kayasthas of Punjab are divided into 890 sub-castes!! One could 
go on giving figures to show this infinite process of splitting social life 
into small fragments. The splitting process has made a social life quite 
impossible. It has made the castes split into such small fragments that 
it has marital relationship consistent with the rule of excluded degrees 
quite impossible. Some of the Baniya sub-castes count no more than 100 
families. They are so interrelated they find it extremely difficult to marry 
within their castes without transgressing the rules of consanguinity. 

It is noteworthy that small excuses suffice to bring about this splitting 
of castes into sub-castes. Castes become sub-divided into sub-castes by 
reason of change of location, change of occupation, change in social 
practices, change due to pollution, changes due to increased prosperity, 
changes due to quarrel and changes due to change of religion. Mr. Blunt 
has given many instances to illustrate this tendency among the Hindus. 
There is no space to reproduce all except one which shows how ordinary 
quarrels lead to the splitting one caste into sub-castes. As stated by 
Mr. Blunt 1 : — 

“In Lucknow there was a sub-caste of Khatika consisting of three 
ghols or groups, known as Manikpur, Jaiswala and Dalman. They 
inter-married, ate together, and met together in panchayat under 
the .presidency of their Chaudharis or headmen. Twenty years ago 
each group had one Chaudhri, but now Jaiswala have three and 
Manikpur two. The quarrel was as follows. Firstly a woman (her 
ghol is not given) peddled fruit about the streets. The brethren 
ordered her to desist from the practice, which is derogatory to the 
caste’s dignity; women should only sell in shops. Her husband and 

^‘The Carte system of Northern India” pp. 51-56. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


103 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLES 103 

she proved contumacious; and finally their own ghol, acting singly, 
outcasted the man. The Dalmu ghol, however, dissenting from this 
action admitted the husband to communion with themselves upon 
payment of a fine of Rs. 80 in lieu of excommunication. Secondly 
a man (the ghol, again is not given) was excommunicated by his 
own ghol, acting alone; and while his case was under trial, the 
Jaiswala Chaudhri invited him to dinner by mistake. Thereupon, 
the three ghols, acting in concert, fined the Chaudhri Rs. 30. 
Lastly, fines had accumulated and it was decided to hold a Katha 
(sacred recitation). The Dalmu Chaudhri said he preferred to have 
his share of money; but the Manikpur Chaudhri (who seems to 
have kept the joint purse) refused, taking up the attitude that 
there was going to be a Katha to which the Dalmu people could 
come or not as they liked. The matter at this stage was brought 
into court; meanwhile the three ghols ceased to inter-marry, so 
that one endogamous sub-caste split into three quarrels, ghol 
was pitted against ghol. 

If in any caste a group should adopt some new or unusual 
worship of which other members do not approve, one would expect 
that group to break off and become an endogamous sub-caste. 

That such sub-castes are uncommon is due to the tolerance about 
what and with whom he eats and whom he marries. We do, 
however, find that the Mahabhiras and Panchipriya sub-castes 
amongst Telis, Koris and the Namakshalis amongst Barhais, 
Bhangis and Kadheras.” 

How do these castes behave towards one another. Their guiding 
principle is ‘be separate’, do not intermarry ‘do not interdine’ and 
‘do not touch’. Mr. Blunt 1 has well described the situation when 
he says: 

“A Hindu sits down to a meal either alone or with his caste 
fellows. The women cannot eat with the men; they wait till their 
lords have finished. So long as the meal or a part of it consists 
of Kachcha food (as it usually does, since Chapatis appear at 
most meals), the man must dine with the precautions of a magic 
ceremony. He sits within a square marked off on the ground 
(chauka) inside which is the Chulha or cooking place. Should a 
stranger’s shadow fall upon this square, all food cooked within it 
is polluted and must be thrown away. In camp, Hindu servants 
may be seen, each well apart from the rest, each within his own 
chauka, cooking his food upon his own mud oven and eating 
alone 

“Rules regarding the acceptance of water are on the whole the 
same as those regarding the acceptance of a pakka food, but with 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


104 


104 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a tendency to greater laxity. The vessel in which the water is 
contained affects the question. A high caste man will allow a low 
caste man to fill his lota (drinking vessel) for him; but he will 
not drink from the lota of that low caste man. Or a high caste 
man will give anybody (save Untouchables) a drink, by pouring 
water from his own lota into that of the drinker; all the men 
employed at stations to supply railway travellers with water are 
Barhais, Baris, Bharbhunjas, Halwais, Kahars, and Nais; and of 
course from higher castes still. 

Rules regarding smoking are stricter. It is very seldom that a 
man will smoke with anybody but a caste fellow; the reason, no 
doubt is that smoking with a man usually involves smoking his 
pipe, and this involves much closer contact even than eating food 
which he has prepared. So stringent is this rule, indeed, that the 
fact that Jats, Ahirs, and Gujars will smoke together has been 
regarded as a ground for supposing that they are closely akin. 

Some castes, the Kayastha for instance, differentiates between 
smoking in narial fashion in which the hands are closed round 
the pipe and the smoke is drawn in without putting the stem 
actually in the mouth — and smoking in the usual way. Little need 
be said on the subject of vessels. There are rules laying down 
what sort of vessels should be made, but they are rather religious 
than social. Hindus must use brass or alloy (although the use of 
alloy is hedged about by numerous and minute injunctions, and 
if such vessels become impure, the only remedy is to get them 
remoulded). The risk of pollution makes it imperative for every 
man to have a few vessels of his own. The minimum consists 
of a lota (drinking vessel), batna (cooking pot), and thali (dish). 
Better class folk add a Katora (spoon) and Gagra (Water pot). 

For feasts, the brotherhood usually keep a set of larger vessels 
of all kinds, which they lend to the host; these are bought with 
the proceeds of fines, and are common property .” 1 

What fraternity can there be in a social order based upon such 
sentiments? Far from working in a spirit of fraternity the mutual 
relations of the castes are fratricidal. Class consciousness, class 
struggle and class war are supposed to be ideologies which came into 
vogue from the writings of Karl Marx. This is a complete mistake. 
India is the land which has experienced class consciousness, class 
struggle. Indeed, India is the land where there has been fought a 
class war between Brahmans and Kshatriyas 2 which lasted for several 

1 In the Northern India the bar to eating together applies only when the food is kachcha 
food. In Southern India the bar is complete and applies even when the food it pucca food. 
Kachcha food is food cooked in water. Pacca food is food cooked in ghee. 

2 See my book ‘Who were the Shudras?’ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


105 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLES 105 

generations and which was fought so hard and with such virulence 
that it turned but to be a war of extermination. 

It must not be supposed that the fratricidal spirit has given place to 
a spirit of fraternity. The same spirit of separation marks the Hindu 
social order today as may be seen from what follows: 

Each class claims a separate origin. Some claim origin from a Rishi 
or from a hero. But in each case it is a different Rishi or a different 
hero having nothing to do with the Rishis and heroes claimed by 
other castes as their progenitors. Each caste is engaged in nothing but 
establishing for itself a status superior to that of another caste. This is 
best illustrated by rules of hypercommensality and rules of hypergamy. 
As pointed out by Mr. Blunt 1 : 

“It is essential to realize that in respect of the cooking taboo, the 
criterion is the caste of the person who cooks the food, not the caste 
of the person who offers it. It follows, therefore, that a high caste 
Hindu can eat the food of a man of any caste, however low, if his host 
possesses a cook of suitable caste. And that is why so many cooks 
are Brahmins. The Hindu draws a distinction between kachcha food, 
which is cooked in water and pucca food which is cooked with ghee 
(clarified butter). This distinction depends on the principle that ghee, 
like all the products of the sacred cow, protects from impurity, and 
since such protection is the object of all food taboos, this convenient 
fiction enables the Hindu to be less particular in the case of pucca 
food than of kachcha food, and to relax his restrictions accordingly: 

Speaking of hypergamy, Mr. Blunt 2 says: — 

“The custom of hypergamy introduces an important modification 
into the marriage laws of many castes. Where it prevails, the 
exogamous groups are classified according to their social position; 
and whilst a group of highest rank will take brides from it, it will 
not give brides to a group of lower rank. The law is found most 
highly developed amongst Rajputs but it is observed by many other 

castes Indeed amongst all Hindus there is probably a tendancy 

towards hypergamy.” 

What is it that has behind these rules regarding hyper-commensality 
and hypergamy ? Nothing else but the spirit of high and low. All castes 
are infested with that spirit and there is no caste which is free from it. 
The Hindu social order is a ladder of castes placed one above the other 
together representing an ascending scale of hatred and a descending 
scale of contempt. 

1 ‘The Caste system of Northern India’ pp. 89-90. 

2 Ibid. ‘The Caste system of Northern India’. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


106 


106 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

This spirit has exhibited itself in the proverbs coined by one caste 
with the object of lampooning another caste. It has given rise even to 
literature by authors of low castes suggesting filthy origin of the so- 
called high caste. The Sahyadrikhand is the best illustration of it. It 
is one of the Puranas which form part of the Hindu sacred literature. 
It is a Purana of a style quite different from the traditional puranas. 
It deals with the origin of the different castes. In doing so, it assigns 
noble origin to other castes while it assigns to the Brahmin caste the 
filthiest origin. 

Does the Hindu social order recognise equality ? The answer must 
be in the negative. That men are born equal is a doctrine which is 
repugnant to the Hindu social order. In the spiritual sense it treats 
the doctrine as false. According to the Hindu social order though it is 
true that men are the children of Prajapati the Creator of the Universe, 
they are not equal on that account. For, they were created from the 
different parts of the body of Prajapati. The Brahmins were created 
from the mouth, the Kshatriyas from the arms, the Vaishyas from his 
thighs and Shudras from his feet. The limbs from which they were 
created being of unequal value the men thus created are as unequal. In 
the biological sense, the Hindu social order does not bother to examine 
whether the doctrine is founded in a fact. If it was not a fact, i.e., men 
were not equal in their character and natural endowments of character 
and intelligence so much the better. On the other hand, if it was a fact, 
i.e., men were equal in character and natural endowments, so much 
the worse for the doctrine. The Hindu social order is indifferent to the 
doctrine as a fact. It is equally indifferent to it as an ethical principle. 
It refuses to recognise that men no matter how profoundly they differ 
as individuals in capacity and character, are equally entitled as human 
beings to consideration and respect and that the well-being of a society 
is likely to be increased if it so plans its organization that, whether 
their powers are great or small, all its members may be equally enabled 
to make the best of such powers as they possess. It will not allow 
equality of circumstances, institutions and manner of life. It is against 
equalitarian temper. 

Ill 

If the Hindu social order is not based on equality and fraternity, what 
are the principles on which it is based ? There is only one answer to 
this question. Though few will be able to realize what they are, there 
is no doubt as to their nature and effect on Hindu society. The Hindu 
social order is reared on three principles. Among these the first and 
foremost is the principle of graded inequality. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


107 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLES 107 

That the principle of graded inequality is a fundamental principle is 
beyond controversy. The four classes are not on horizontal plane, different 
but equal. They are on vertical plane. Not only different but unequal 
in status, one standing above the other. In the scheme of Manu, the 
Brahmin is placed at the first in rank. Below him is the Kshatriya. Below 
the Kshatriya is the Vaishya. Below Vaishya is the Shudra and below 
Shudra is the Ati-shudra or the Untouchable. This order of precedence 
among the classes is not merely conventional. It is spiritual, moral and 
legal. There is no sphere of life which is not regulated by this principle 
of graded inequality. 

One can substantiate this by numerous illustrations from the Manu 
Smriti. I will take four illustrations to prove the point. They will be 
the law of slavery, law of marriage, law of punishment and law of 
Samskaras and law of Sanyas. The Hindu law recognised slavery as a 
legal institution. Manu Smriti recognised seven kinds of slaves. Narada 
Smriti recognised fifteen kinds of slaves. These differences as to the 
number of slaves and the classes under which they fall is a matter of 
no importance. What is important is to know who could enslave whom. 
On this point, the following citations from the Narada Smriti and the 
Yajnavalkya Smriti are revealing: 

Narada Smriti: V. 39. “In the inverse order of four castes slavery 
is not ordained except where a man violates the duties peculiar to his 
caste. Slavery (in that respect) is analogous to the condition of a wife.” 

Yajnavalkya Smriti: XVI. 183 (2). “Slavery is in the descending order 
of the Varnas and not in the ascending order.” 

Recognition of slavery was bad enough. But if the rule of slavery had 
been left free to take its own course it would have had at least one 
beneficial effect. It would have been a levelling force. The foundation 
of caste would have been destroyed. For under it, a Brahmin might 
have become the slave of the Untouchables and the Untouchables 
would have become the masters of the Brahmin. But it was seen that 
unfettered slavery was an equilitarian principle and an attempt was 
made to nullify it. Manu and his successors therefore while recognising 
slavery ordian that it shall not be recognized in its inverse order to the 
Varna system. That means that a Brahmin may become the slave of 
another Brahmin. But he shall not be the slave of a person of another 
Varna, i.e., of the Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra, or Ati-Shudra. On the 
other hand, a Brahmin may hold as his slave anyone belonging to the 
four Varnas. A Kshatriya can have a Kshatriya, Vaishya, Shudra and 
Ati-Shudra as his slaves but not one who is a Brahmin. A Vaishya 
can have a Vaishya, Shudra and Ati-Shudra as his slaves but not one 
who is a Brahmin or a Kshatriya. A Shudra can hold a Shudra and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


108 


108 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

an Ati-Shudra, as his slaves but not one who is a Brahmin, Kshatriya 
or a Vaishya. Ati-Shudra can hold an Ati-Shudra as his slave but not 
one who is a Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya or Shudra. 

Another illustration of this principle of graded inequality is to be 
found in the Laws of marriage. Manu says: — 

III. 12. “For the first marriage of the twice-born classes, a woman 
of the same class is recommended but for such as are impelled by 
inclination to marry again, women in the direct order of the classes 
are to be preferred.” 

III. 13. “A Shudra woman only must be the wife of a Shudra; she 
and a Vaishya, of a Vaishya; they two and a Kshatriya of a Kshatriya; 
those three and a Brahmani of a Brahmin.” 

Manu is of course opposed to inter-marriage. His injunction is for each 
class to marry within his class. But he does recognize marriage outside 
the defined class. Here again, he is particularly careful not to allow 
inter-marriage to do harm to his principle of inequality among classes. 
Like slavery he permits inter-marriage but not in the inverse order. ‘A 
Brahmin when marrying outside his class may marry any woman from 
any of the classes below him. A Kshatriya is free to marry a woman 
from the two classes next below him, namely, the Vaishya and Shudra 
but must not marry a woman from the Brahmin class which is above 
him. A Vaishya is free to marry a woman from the Shudra class which 
is next below him. But he cannot marry a woman from the Brahmin 
and the Kshatriya class which are above him. 

The third illustration is to be found in the Rule of Law as enunciated 
by Manu. First as to treatment to be given to witnesses. According to 
Manu, they are to be sworn as follows: 

VIII. 87. “In the forenoon let the judge, being purified, severally 
call on the twice-born, being purified also, to declare the truth, in the 
presence of some image, a symbol of the divinity and of Brahmins, while 
the witnesses turn their faces either to the north, or to the east.” 

VIII. 88. “To a Brahmin he must begin with saying ‘Declare’; to a 
Kshatriya, with saying ‘Declare the truth’; to a Vaishya admonishing 
him by mentioning his kine, grain or gold; to a Shudra, threatening him 
with the guilt of every crime that causes loss of caste.” 

Take the punishment of offences as laid down by Manu. To begin 
with, punishment for defamation: 

VIII. 267. “A soldier, defaming a priest, shall be fined a hundred 
panas; merchant thus offending, a hundred and fifty, or two hundred; 
but for such an offence a mechanic or servile man shall be whipped.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


109 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLES 109 

VIII. 268. “A priest shall be fined fifty if he slanders a soldier; 
twenty-five if a merchant and twelve if he slanders a man of the 
servile class.” 

Take the offence of insults. The punishment prescribed by Manu 
is as follows: 

VIII. 270. “A Shudra who insults a Dvija with gross invectives, 
ought to have his tongue slit for he sprang from the lowest part of 
Brahma.” 

VIII. 271. “If he mentions their names and classes with contumely, 
as if he says, ‘Oh Devadatta, thou refuse of Brahmin’; an iron style, 
ten fingers long, shall be thrust red into his mouth.” 

VIII. 272. “Should he, through pride, give instructions to Brahmins 
concerning their duty; let the king order some hot oil to be dropped 
into his mouth and his ear.” 

Punishment for the offence of abuse. Manu says: 

VIII. 276. “For mutual abuse by a Brahmin and a Kshatriya, this 
fine must be imposed by a learned king; the lowest on the Brahmin 
and the middlemost on the soldier.” 

VIII. 277. “A Vaishya and a Shudra must be punished exactly in the 
same manner according to their respective castes, except the slitting 
of the tongue of the Shudras. This is the fixed rule of punishment.” 

Punishment for the offence of assault. Manu propounds: 

VIII. 279. “With whatever limb a Shudra shall assault or hurt a 
Dvija that limb, of his shall be cut off, this is in accordance of Manu.” 

Punishment for the offence of arrogance. According to Manu: 

VIII. 281. “A Shudra who shall insolently place himself on the 
same seat with 9 man of high caste, shall either be branded on his 
hip and be banished or the King shall cause a gash to be made on 
his buttock.” 

VIII. 282. “Should he spit on him through pride, the king shall 
order both his lips to be gashed; should he urine on him, his penis; 
should he break wind against him, his anus.” 

VIII. 283. “If he seizes the Brahmin by the locks or likewise if he 
takes him by the feet, let the king unhesitatingly cut off his hands, 
or by the beard, or by the throat or by the scrotum.” 

Punishment for the offence of adultery. Says Manu. 

VIII. 359. “A man who is not a Brahmin who commits actual 
adultery ought to suffer death; for the wives, indeed of all the four 
classes must ever be most especially guarded.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


110 


110 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

VIII. 366. “A Shudra who makes love to a damsel of high birth, 
ought to be punished corporally; but he who addresses a maid of 
equal rank, shall give the nuptial present and marry her, if her 
father desires it.” 

VIII. 374. “A Shudra having an adulterous connection with a woman 
of a twice-born class, whether guarded at home or unguarded shall 
thus be punished in the following manner; if she was unguarded, he 
shall lose the part offending and all his property; if guarded everything 
even his life.” 

VIII. 375. “For adultery with a guarded Brahmin a Vaishya shall 
forfeit all his wealth after imprisonment for a year; a Kshatriya shall 
be fined a thousand panas, and he be shaved with the urine of an ass.” 

VIII. 376. “But if a Vaishya or Kshatriya commits adultery with 
an unguarded Brahmin, the king shall only fine the Vaishya five 
hundred panas and the Kshatriya a thousand.” 

VIII. 377. “But even these two however, it they commit that offence 
with a Brahmani not only guarded but the wife of an eminent man, 
shall be punished like a Shudra or be burned in a fire of dry grass 
or reeds.” 

VIII. 382. “If a Vaishya approaches a guarded female of the Kshatriya 
or a Kshatriya a guarded Vaishya-woman, they both deserve the same 
punishment as in the case of an unguarded Brahmin female.” 

VIII. 383. “But a Brahmin, who shall commit adultery with a 
guarded woman of those two classes, must be fined a thousand panas, 
and for the offending with a Shudra woman the fine of a thousand 
panas on a Kshatriya or Vaishya.” 

VIII. 384. “For adultery by a Vaishya with a woman of the Kshatriya 
classes, if guarded, the fine is five hundred; but a Kshatriya for 
committing adultery on a Vaishya woman must be shaved with urine 
or pay the fine just mentioned.” 

How strange is the contrast between Hindu and non-Hindu 
criminal jurisprudence! How inequality is writ large in Hinduism 
as seen in its criminal jurisprudence! In a Penal Code charged 
with the spirit of justice we find two things — a section dealing 
with defining the crime and a section prescribing a rational form 
of punishment for breach of it and a rule that all offenders are 
liable to the same penalty. In Manu, what do we find? First 
an irrational system of punishment. The punishment for a 
crime is inflicted on the origin concerned in the crime such as 
belly, tongue, nose, eyes, ears, organs of generation etc., as if 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


111 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLES 111 

the offending organ was sentiment having a will for its own and had not 
been merely a survitor of human being. Second feature of Manu’s Penal 
Code is the inhuman character of the punishment which has no proportion 
to the gravity of the offence. But the most striking feature of Manu’s 
Penal Code which stands out in all its nakedness is the inequality of 
punishment for the same offence. Inequality designed not merely to punish 
the offender but to protect also the dignity and to maintain the baseness 
of the parties coming to a Court of Law to seek justice; in other words 
to maintain the social inequality on which his whole scheme is founded. 

The principle of graded inequality has been carried into the economic 
field. “From each according to his ability; to each according to his need” 
is not the principle of Hindu social order. The principle of the Hindu 
social order is: “From each according to his need. To each according to his 
nobility.” Supposing an officer was distributing dole to a famine striken 
people. He would be bound to give greater dole to a person of high birth 
than he would to a person of low birth. Supposing an officer was levying 
taxation. He would be bound to assess a person of high birth at a lower 
rate than he would to a person of low birth. The Hindu social order does 
not recognise equal need, equal work or equal ability as the basis of 
reward for labour. Its motto is that in regard to the distribution of the 
good things of life those who are reckoned as the highest must get the 
most and the best and those who are classed as the lowest must accept 
the least and the worst. 

Nothing more seems to be necessary to prove that the Hindu social 
order is based on the principle of graded inequality. It pervades all 
departments of social life. Every side of social life is protected against 
the danger of equality. 

The second principle on which the Hindu social order is founded is that 
of fixity of occupations for each class and continuance thereof by heredity. 
This is what Manu says about occupations of the four classes. 

“I. 87. But in order to protect this universe, He, the most resplendent 
one, assigned separate (duties and) occupations, to those who sprang from 
his mouth, arms, thighs and feet. 

I. 88. To Brahmanas he assigned teaching and studying (the Veda) 
sacrificing for their own benefit and for others, giving and accepting (of 
alms). 

I. 89. The Kshatriya he commanded to protect the people, to bestow 
gifts to offer sacrifices to study (the Veda) and to abstain from attaching 
himself to sensual pleasures.” 

1 The illustrations given above are not merely drawn from imagination. They are facts of 
history. The differentiation between high and low was recognised by law in the time of the 
Peshwas. The differentiation about dole exists even now in the Bombay Presidency and 
was defended by a Congress Minister. These Remarks are not applicable today — Editors. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


112 


112 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“I. 90. The Vaishya to tend cattle to bestow gifts to offer sacrifices 
to study (the Veda) and to abstain from attaching himself to sensual 
pleasures.” 

I. 91. One occupation only the Lord prescribed to the Shudra, to serve 
meekly even these (other) three castes.” 

These rules regarding the occupations of the different classes are 
further amplified by Manu as will be seen from the following citations 
from his Smriti: 

“I. 88. To Brahmans he (Swayambhu Manu) assigned the duties of 
reading the Veda, of teaching it, of sacrificing, of assisting others to 
sacrifice, of giving alms if they be rich, and if indigent of receiving of gifts. 

I. 89. To defend the people, to give alms, to sacrifice, to read the 
Veda, to shun the allurements of sensual gratification, are in a few 
words, the duties of a Kshatnya. 

I. 90. To keep herds of cattle, to bestow largeness, to sacrifice, to read 
the scriptures, to carry on trade, to lend at interest, and to cultivate 
land are prescribed or permitted to a Vaishya. 

I. 91. One principal duty the supreme Ruler assigns to a Shudra; 
namely, to serve the beforementioned classes, without depreciating 
their worth. 

X. 74. Let such Brahmans as are intent on the means of attaining 
the supreme godhead, and firm in their own duties, completely perform 
in order, the six following acts. 

X. 75. Reading the Vedas, the teaching others to read them, sacrificing, 
and assisting others to sacrifice, giving to the poor if themselves have 
enough, and accepting gifts from the virtuous if themselves are poor, 
are the six prescribed acts of the firstborn class.” 

“X. 76. But, among those six acts of a Brahman three are his means 
of subsistence; assisting to sacrifice, teaching the Vedas and receiving 
gifts from a purehanded giver. 

X. 77. Three acts of duty cease with the Brahman and belong not to 
the Kshatriya, teaching the Vedas, officiating at a sacrifice and thirdly 
receiving presents. 

X. 78. Those three are also (by the fixed rule of law) forbidden to the 
Vaishya since Manu, the Lord of all men, prescribed not those acts to 
the two classes, military and commercial. 

X. 79. The means of subsistence peculiar to the Kshatriya are bearing 
arms, either held for striking or missile; to the Vajshya, merchandise, 
attending on cattle, and agriculture; but with a view to the next life, 
the duties of both are alms giving, reading and sacrificing.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


113 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLES 113 

Every member must follow the trade assigned to the class to which he 
belongs. It leaves no scope for individual choice, individual inclination. 
An individual under the Hindu social order is bound to the profession 
of his ancestor. It is an inexorable law from which he cannot escape. 

The principle does not stop with fixity of occupation. It grades the 
several occupations in terms of respectability. This is what Manu says: — 

“X. 80. Among the several occupations for gaining a livelihood the 

most commendable respectively for the Brahmans, Kshatriyas and the 

Vaishyas are the teaching of the Vedas, defending the people and trade. 

The third principle on which the Hindu social order is founded is 
the fixation of people within their respective classes. There is nothing 
strange or peculiar in the fact that the Hindu social order recognizes 
classes. There are classes everywhere and no society is without them. 
Families, cliques, clubs, political parries, nay communities, gangs engaged 
in criminal conspiracies, business corporations which prey upon the 
public are to be found in all societies in all parts of the world. Even a 
free social order will not be able to get rid of the classes. What a free 
social order aims to do is to prevent isolation and exclusiveness being 
regarded by the classes as an ideal to be followed. For so long as the 
classes do not practise isolation and exlusiveness they are only non-social 
in their relations towards one another. Isolation and exclusiveness make 
them anti-social and inimical towards one another. Isolation makes for 
rigidity of class consciousness, for institutionalizing social life and for 
the dominance of selfish ideals within the classes. Isolation makes life 
static, continues the separation into a privileged and underprivileged, 
masters and servants. 

Not so much the existence of classes as the spirit of isolation and 
exlusiveness which is inimical with a free social order. What a free social 
order endeavours to do is to maintain all channels of social endosmosis. 
This is possible only when the classes are free to share in an extensive 
number of common interests, undertakings and expenses, have a large 
number of values in common, when there is a free play back and forth, 
when they have an equable opportunity to receive and to take from 
others. Such social contacts must and does dissolve custom, makes for 
an alert and expanding mental life and not only occasion but demand 
reconstruction of mental attitudes. What is striking about the Hindu 
social order is its ban on free inter-change and inter-course between 
different classes of Hindu society. There is a bar against inter-dining 
and inter-marriage. But Manu goes to the length of interdicting ordinary 
social intercourse. Says Manu: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


114 


114 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

IV. 244. “He, who seeks to preserve an exalted rank, must constantly 
form connections with the highest and best families, but avoid the worst 
and the meanest. 

IV. 245. Since a priest, who connects himself with the best and the 
highest of men, avoiding the lowest and worst, attains eminence; but 
sinks by an opposite conduct, to the class of the servile. 

IV. 79. Not let him tarry even under the shade of the same tree with 
outcaste for the great crimes, nor with Chandalas, nor with Puccasas, 
nor with idiots, nor with man proud of wealth, nor with washermen 
and other vile persons, nor with Antyevasins.” 

The Hindu social order is opposed to fraternity. It does not admit the 
principle of equality. Far from recognising equality it makes inequality 
its official doctrine. What about liberty? So far as choice of occupation 
goes, there is none. Everyone has his occupation determined for him. 
Only thing left to do is to carry it on. As to freedom of speech it exists. 
But it exists only for those who are in favour of the social order. The 
freedom is not the freedom of liberalism which was expressed by Voltaire 
when he said “I wholly disapprove of what you say and will defend to 
the death your right to say it. “This is clear from what Manu has to 
say about Logic and dialectics. 

“IV. 29-30. No guest must stay in his house without being honoured 
according to his ability, with a seat, food, a couch, water, or roots and 
fruits. 

Let him not honour even by a greeting heretics, men who follow 
forbidden occupations, men who live like cats, rogues, logicians (arguing 
against the Veda) and those who live like herons. 

II. 10. But by Sruti (Revelation) is meant the Vedas and by Smriti 
(tradition) the Institutes of the sacred law; those two must not be 
called into question in any matter, since from those two the sacred 
law shone forth. 

II. 11. Every twice-born man, who, relying on the Institutes of 
dialectics, treats with contempt those two sources (of the law), must 
be cast out by the virtuous as an atheist and a scorner of the Veda. 

II. 12. The Veda, the sacred tradition, the customs of virtuous men, 
and one’s own pleasure, they declare to be visibly the fourfold means 
of defining the sacred law.” The reasons for this are made manifest by 
Manu who says: 

II. 6. “The whole Veda is the (first) source of the sacred law, next 
the tradition and the virtuous conduct of those who know the (Veda 
further) also the customs of holy men, and (finally) self-satisfaction : 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


115 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS ESSENTIAL PRINCIPLES 115 

II. 7. Whatever law has been ordained for any (person) by Manu; that 

has been fully declared in the Veda; for that (sage was) omniscient.” 

In this freedom there is not freedom for dialecticians, no freedom for 
logicians to criticise the social order which means there is no freedom 
at all. 

What about liberty of action ? In the sense of effective choice, there is 
no room for it in the Hindu social order. The Hindu social order leaves 
no choice to the individual. It fixes his occupation. It fixes his status. 
All that remains for the individual to do is to conform himself to these 
regulations. 

The same must be said with regard to political liberty. The Hindu social 
order does not recognise the necessity of a representative government 
composed of the representatives chosen by the people. Representative 
Government rests on the belief that people must be governed by law and 
law can be made only by the representative of the people. The Hindu 
social order recognises the first part of this thesis which says that people 
must be governed by law. But it denies the second part of the thesis 
which says that law can be made only by the representatives chosen by 
the people. The tenets of the Hindu social order is that the law by which 
people are to be governed is already made and is to be found in the 
Vedas. Nobody has a right to add to and subtract from it. That being so, 
a representative assembly of the people is unnecessary. Political liberty 
which is liberty to frame laws and to make and unmake Government is 
futility for which there is no place in the Hindu social order. 

To sum up, the Hindu social order is an order based on classes and 
not on individual. It is an order in which classes are graded one above 
the other. It is an order in which the status and functions of the classes 
are determined and fixed. The Hindu social order is a rigid order. No 
matter what changes take place in the relative position of an individual 
his social status as a member of the class he is born in relation to another 
person belonging to another class shall in no way be affected. The first 
shall never become the last. The last shall never become the first. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


116 


CHAPTER 3 

The Hindu Social Order: 

Its Unique Features 

So far the discussions were confined to describing the essentials 
of the Hindu social order. Besides its essentials, the Hindu social 
order has some unique features. These unique features are as 
important as the essentials. No study of the Hindu social order 
which does not make any reference to them can be regraded as 
complete or accurate. 

What are these special features ? The special features of the Hindu 
social order are three in number. Of these three, the most striking is 
the worship of the superman. In this respect the Hindu social order 
is nothing but Nietzsche’s Gospel put in action. Nietzsche himself 
never claimed any originality for his theory of the superman. He 
admitted and avowed that he borrowed it from the Manu Smriti. 
In his treatise, called Anti-Christ this is what Nietzsche said: — 

“After all. the question is, to what end are falsehoods 
perpetrated ? The fact that, in Christianity,’ Holy’ ends are 
entirely absent, constitutes my objection to the means it employs. 

Its ends are only bad ends; the poisoning, the calumination and 
the denial of life, the contempt of the body, the degradation 
and self-pollution of man by virtue of the contempt of sin, — 
consequently its means are bad as well. My feelings are quite 
the reverse when I read the law book of Manu, an incomparably 
intellectual and superior work, which it would be a sin against 
the spirit even to mention in the same breath with the Bible. 

You will guess immediately why it has a genuine philosophy 
behind it. In it, not merely an evil smelling Jewish distillation 
of Rabbinism and superstition — it gives something to chew 
even to the most fastidious psychologist. And, not to forget the 
most important point of all, it is fundamentally different from 
the very kind of Bible; by means of it the noble classes, the 
philosophers and the warriors guard and guide the masses; 
it is replete with noble values, it is filled with a feeling of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


117 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS UNIQUE FEATURES 117 

perfection with saying yea to life, triumphant sense of well-being in 
regard to itself and to life, — the Sun shines upon the whole book. 

All those things which Christianity smothers with its bottomless 
vulgarity; procreation, women, marriage are here treated with 
earnestness, with reverence, with love and confidence. How can 
one possibly place in the hands of children and women, a book 
that contains those vile words;’ to avoid fornication let every man 

have his wife, let every woman have her own husband It is 

better to marry than to burn. And is it decent to be a Christian 
so long as the very origin of man is Christianised — that is to say, 
befouled, by the idea of the immaculate conception.” 

Nietzsche never got any respectful or serious hearing in his own 
country. In his own words, he was ‘sometimes defied as the philosopher 
of the aristocracy and squiarchy, sometimes hooted at, sometimes pitied 
and sometimes boycotted as an inhuman being.’ Nietzsche’s philosophy 
had become identified with will to power, will to violence and denial of 
spiritual values, sacrifice, servility to and debasement of the common 
man in the interest of the Superman. His philosophy with these 
high spots had created a feeling of loathsomeness and horror in the 
minds of the people of his own generation. He was utterly neglected 
if not shunned and Nietzsche himself took comfort by placing himself 
among the ‘posthumous men’. He foresaw for himself a remote public, 
centuries after his own time to appreciate him. Here too Nietzsche was 
destined to be disappointed. Instead of there being any appreciation 
of his philosophy the lapse of time has only augmented the horror 
and loathing which people of his generation felt for Nietzsche. Having 
regard to the vile nature of Nietzsche’s philosophy some people may 
not be ready to believe that the Hindu social order is based on the 
worship of the Superman. 

Let the Manu Smriti speak on this point. This is what Manu says 
with regard to the position of the Brahmin in the Hindu social order. 

I. 93. “As the Brahmana sprang from Prajapati’s (i.e. God’s) 
mouth, as he was first-born, and as he possesses the Veda, he is 
by right the Lord of this whole creation.” 

I. 94. “For the self-existent (Swayambhu) i.e. God having 
performed austerities, produced him first from his own mouth, 
in order that the offerings might be conveyed to the Gods and 
Manes and that this universe might be preserved.” 

I. 95. “What created being can surpass him, through whose 
mouth the Gods continually consume the sacrificial viands and 
the Manes the offerings to the dead.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


118 


118 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

I. 96. “Of created beings the most excellent are said to be those which 
are animated, of the animated those who subsist by intelligence; of the 
intelligent mankind, and of the men the Brahmans.” 

Besides the reason given by Manu the Brahman is first in rank because 
he was produced by God from his mouth, in order that the offerings 
might be conveyed to the Gods and manes, Manu gives another reason 
for the supremacy of the Brahman. He says: 

I. 98. “The very birth of a Brahmana is an eternal incarnation of the 
sacred law (Veda) for he is born to (fulfil) the sacred law, and becomes 
one with Brahman (God.)” 

I. 99. “A Brahmana coming into existence, is born as the highest on 
earth, the Lord of all created beings, for the protection of the treasury 
of the law.” Manu concludes by saying that: 

I. 101. “The Brahmana eats but his own food, wears but his own 
apparel, bestows but his own in alms; other mortals subsist through the 
benevolence of the Brahmana.” Because according to Manu: 

I. 100. “Whatever exists in the world is the property of the Brahmana; 
on account of the excellence of his origin the Brahmana is, indeed, 
entitled to it all.” Being a deity the Brahman is above law and above 
the king. Manu directs: 

VII. 37. “Let the king, rising early in the morning, worship Brahmanas 
who are well-versed in the threefold sacred science and learned (in polity) 
and follow their advice.” 

VII. 38. “Let him daily worship aged Brahmans who know the Veda 
and are pure ” 

Finally Manu says: 

XI. 35. “The Brahman is (hereby) declared to be the creator (of the 
world), the punisher, the teacher, (and hence) a benefactor (of all created 
beings) to him let no man say anything unpropitious, nor use any harsh 
words.” Manu ordains that: 

X. 3. “From priority of birth, from superiority of origin, from a more 
exact knowledge of scripture, and from a distinction in the sacrificial 
thread, the Brahman is the lord of all classes.” 

The Brahmin or the Superman of the Hindu social order was entitled 
to certain privileges. In the first place, he could not be hanged even 
though he might be guilty of murder . 1 Manu says: 

1 This immunity was continued by the British Government up to 1837. It was in 1837 
the Penal Law was amended whereby the Brahman for the first time became liable to 
capital punishment for murder. The immunity still exists in Indian States. In Travancore 
the Dewan who is a Brahmin adopted an ingenious method of meeting public criticism of 
this continuance of this privilege, instead of hanging the Brahmins he abolished capital 
punishment altogether. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


119 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS UNIQUE FEATURES 119 

VIII. 379. “Ignominous tonsure is ordained, instead of capital 
punishment, for a Brahmin adulterer where the punishment of other 
classes may extend to loss of life.” 

VIII. 380. “Never shall the king slay a Brahmin, though convicted 
of all possible crimes; let him banish the offender from his realm, but 
with all his property secure, and his body unhurt.” 

XI. 127. “For a Brahmin killing intentionally a virtuous man of the 
Kshatriya class, the penance must be a fourth part of that ordained 
for killing a priest; for killing a Vaishya, only an eighth; for killing a 
Shudra, who had been constant in discharging his duties a sixteenth 
part.” 

XI. 128. “But, if a Brahmin kills a Kshatriya without malice, he must, 
after a full performance of his religious rites, give the priests one bull 
together with a thousand cows.” 

XI. 129. “Or he may perform for three years the penance for slaying 
a Brahmin, mortifying his organs of sensation and action, letting his 
hair grow long, and living remote from the town, with the root of a 
tree for his mansion.” 

XI. 130. “If he kills without malice a Vaishya, who had a good moral 
character, he may perform the same penance for one year, or give the 
priests a hundred cows and a bull.” 

XI. 131. “For six months must, he perform this whole penance, if 
without intention he kills a Shudra, or he may give ten white cows 
and a bull to the priests.” 

VIII. 381. “No greater crime is known on earth than slaying a 
Brahmin; and the king, therefore must not even form in his mind an 
idea of killing a priest.” 

VIII. 126. “Let the king having considered and ascertained the 
frequency of a similar offence, the place and time, the ability of the 
criminal to pay or suffer and the crime itself, cause punishment to fall 
on those alone, who deserve it.” 

VIII. 124. “Manu, son of the self-existent, has named ten places of 
punishment, which are appropriated to the three lower classes, but a 
Brahmin must depart from the realm unhurt in any one of them.” 

The Brahmin has been given by the Manu Smriti other 
privileges. In the matter of marriage in addition to his marrying 
a woman of his own class he is entitled 1 to enter into wedlock 
with a woman of any of the classes lower to him without being 
bound to the woman by the tie of marriage or conferring upon 
the children the right to his status or to his property. He had the 
Manu III. 12-13. This privilege is recognised by Courts in India. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


120 


120 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

power to punish his wrongdoer without resort to court 1 . He could take 
the property of the common man (the Shudra) without compensation and 
without reference to court if the same was necessary for the performance 
of his religious duties 2 . If he discovers a hidden treasure he was free to 
appropriate the whole 3 of it without giving the usual share to the king 
‘since he was the lord of all’ and was entitled to claim half 4 if it was 
discovered by another. He was entitled to whole amount accumulated 
from legal fines from a king whose death was due to some incurable 
disease . 5 He was exempt from taxation 6 . He was entitled to compel the 
king to provide for his daily food and to see that he did not starve 7 . His 
property was free from the law of escheat . 8 

The superman of the Hindu Social order is not bound by the rules as 
to occupation if he is in distress. 

Manu says: — 

X. 81. “Yet a Brahman, unable to subsist by his duties just mentioned, 
may live by the duty of a soldier; for that is the next in rank.” 

X. 82. “If it be asked, how he must live, should he be unable to get 
a subsistence by either of those employments; the answer is, he may 
subsist as a mercantile man, applying himself in person to tillage and 
attendance on cattle.” 

X. 83. “But a Brahman and a Kshatriya, obliged to subsist by the acts 
of a Vaishya, must avoid with care, if they can live by keeping herds, the 
business of tillage, which gives great pain’ to sentient creatures, and is 
dependent on the labour of others, as bulls and so forth.” 

X. 84. “Some are of opinion, that agriculture is excellent but it is a mode 
of subsistence which the benevolent greatly blame, for the iron mouthed 
pieces of wood not only wound the earth, but the creatures dwelling in it.” 

X. 85. “If, through want of a virtuous livelihood, they cannot follow 
laudable occupations, they may then gain a competence of wealth by 
selling commodities usually sold by merchants, avoiding what ought to 
be avoided.” 

X. 102. “The Brahmana, having fallen into distress, may receive gifts 
from any person whatever; for by no sacred rule can it be shown, that 
absolute purity can be sullied.” 


1 Manu XI. 31 — This privilege has been abolished. 

2 Manu XI. 32. — This privilege no longer exists. 

3 Manu VIII. 37. 

4 Manu VIII. 38. 

B Manu IX. 323. 

G Manu VII. 133. 

7 Manu VII. 134. 

8 Manu IX. 189 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


121 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS UNIQUE FEATURES 121 

X. 103. “From interpreting the Veda, from officiating at sacrifices or 
from taking presents, though in modes generally disapproved, no sin is 
committed by priests in distress; for they are as pure as fire or water.” 

The privileges of the superman are not at all counterbalanced by an 
obligation towards the common man. Indeed the superman has no duty 
towards the common man. 

He is not bound to do charity for the uplift of the Comman man. On 
the other hand, to receive charity is the monopoly of the Superman. 
For any other person to receive charity is a sin. To the Common man 
(Shudra) who is born to serve the Superman man, the Superman is not 
at all required to be a good employer and is not bound to keep him 
well-fed, well clothed and well-housed. His obligations in this behalf as 
laid down by Manu are stated below: 

X. 124. “They must allot to him (Shudra) out of their own family 
property a suitable maintenance after considering his ability, his industry 
and the number of those whom he is bound to support.” 

X. 125. “The remnants of their food must be given to him, as well 
as their old clothes, the refuse of their grain, and their old household 
furniture. 

The rise of the Common man is antagonistic to the supremacy of the 
Superman. In order to keep the Superman satisfied, happy and secure 
the Hindu social order takes special care to keep the Common man in 
a state of perpetual degradation. 

Manu insists on the Shudra doing nothing but service: 

X. 122. “But let a Shudra serve Brahmanas.” 

X. 121. “If a Shudra unable to subsist by serving Brahmanas seeks 
a livelihood, he may serve Kshatriyas, or he may also seek to maintain 
himself by attending on a wealthy Vaishya.” 

I. 91. “One occupation only the lord prescribed to the Shudra, to serve 
meekly even these other three castes.” 

And why ? Manu does not hesitate to give the reason. He says : 

X. 129. “No superfluous collection of wealth must be made by a Shudra, 
even though he has power to make it, since a servile man, who has 
amassed riches, becomes proud, and, by his insolence or neglect, gives 
pain even to Brahmanas.” 

The common man is not permitted to acquire learning. The following 
are the injunctions of Manu: 

I. 88. “To the Brahmanas he (the creator) assigned teaching and 
studying the Veda.” 

I. 89. “The Kshatriya he (the creator) commanded to study the Veda.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


122 


122 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

II. 116. “He who shall acquire knowledge of the Veda without the 
assent of his preceptor incurs the guilt of stealing the scriputre, and 
shall sink to the region of torment.” 

IV. 99. “He (the twice-born) must never read the Veda... in the presence 
of the Shudras.” 

IX. 18. “Women have no business with the text of the Veda.” 

IX. 199. “A twice-born man who has (improperly) divulged the 

Veda (ie., to Shudras and women) commits sin, atones for his offence, 
if he subsists a year on barley.” 

In those texts there are embodied three distinct propositions. The 
Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas can study the Vedas. Of these the 
Brahmans alone have the right to teach the Vedas. But in the case of 
the Shudra he has not only to study the Vedas but he should not be 
allowed to hear it read. 

The successsors of Manu made the disability of the Shudra in the 
matter of the study of the Veda into an offence involving dire penalties. 
For instance, Gautama says: 

III. 4. “If the Shudra intentionally listens for committing to memory 
the Veda, then his ears should be filled with (molten) lead and lac; if he 
utters the Veda, then his tongue should be cut off; if he has mastered 
the Veda his body should be cut to pieces. “ 

To the same effect is Katyayana. 

The common man (Shudra) is not allowed the benefit of the sacrament 
of initiation. It is the second birth that helps towards the moral and 
material advancement of the individual. 

The common man is denied the right to have a name conveying 
dignity. Manu says: 

II. 30. “Let the father perform or cause to be performed the Namadheya 
(the rite of name of the child), on the tenth or twelfth (day after birth), 
or on a lucky lunar day in a lucky muhurth under an auspicious 
constellation. 

II. 31. “Let (the first part of) a Brahman’s name (denote something) 
auspicious, a Kshatriya name be connected with power, and a Vaishya 
with wealth, but a Shudra’s (express something) contemptible.” 

II. 32. “(The second part of) a Brahman’s name shall be a word 
implying happiness, of a Kshatriya (a word) implying protection, of a 
Vaishya (a term) expressive of thriving and of a Shudra’s (an expression) 
denoting a service.” 

The Superman will not tolerate the Shudra to have the comfort of a 
high-sounding name. He must be contemptible both in fact and in name. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


123 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS UNIQUE FEATURES 123 

A Hindu’s life is divided into periods. The first period is called 
Brahmacharya, the stage of a student. The second period is called 
Grahasthashram, the stage of married life. The third period is called 
Vanasprastha, the stage of detachment from worldly life. The fourth 
period is called Sanyasa which is complete severance from the affairs 
of the world which is tantamount to civil death. The common man is 
denied the right of becoming a Sanyasi. It is difficult to understand 
why. Obviously for the benefit of the Superman. A Shudra by becoming 
a Sanyasi ceases to render service to Superman. A Shudra by becoming 
a Sanyasi reaches God or Brahma which is an invasion of the privileges 
of the Superman. 

The citations from Manu prove that the Hindu social order is openly 
and avowedly devised and intended for the good of the Superman. In it 
everything is ordained for the Superman. The Superman is the Brahmin 
and the common man is the Shudra. The Superman has rights and no 
duties. Everyithing is at the disposal of the Superman, everything must 
be ascribed in the interests of the Superman. The counterpart of the 
same feature is the degradation of the common man. As against the 
Superman the common man has no right to life, liberty, property or 
pursuit of happiness. He must be ready to sacrifice everything for the 
sustenance of the life and dignity of the Superman. The Hindu social order 
prescribes that such sacrifice should be made willingly by the common 
man. Indeed, it inculcates that the common man should respond to such 
call for sacrifice in the interest of the Superman as his supreme duty. 

Can there be any doubt that Zarathustra is a new name for Manu 
and that ‘Thus spake Zarathustra’ is a new edition of the Manu Smriti? 

If there is any difference between Manu and Nietzsche, it lies in this. 
Nietzsche was genuinely interested in creating a new race of men which 
will be race of Superman as compared with the existing race of men. 
Manu, on the other hand, was interested in maintaining the privilege of 
a class who had come to arrogate to itself the claim of being Superman. 
Nietzsche’s Supermen were Supermen by reason of their worth. Nietzsche 
was a genuine distinterested philosopher. Manu, on the contrary, was 
a hireling engaged to propound a philosophy which served the interests 
of a class, born in a group and whose title to being Superman was not 
to be lost even if they lost their virtue. Compare the following texts 
from Manu . 1 

X. 81. “Yet, a Brahmin, unable to subsist by his duties just mentioned, 

may live by the duty of a soldier; for that is the next rank.” 

1 The correct description of the Brahmin would be the Supermost Superman. For below 
him and above the common man there are the Kshatriyas and the Vaishyas. But since 
the Kshatriyas and the Vaishyas are only superiors and not supermen it is unnecessary 
to change the nomenclature. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


124 


124 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

X. 82. “If it be asked, how he must live, should he be unable to 
get a subsistence by either of those employments; the answer is, he 
may subsist as a mercantile man, applying himself to tillage and an 
attendance on cattle.” 

Manu adds: 

IX. 317. “A Brahmin, be he ignorant or learned, is a great divinity, 
just as the fire, whether carried forth (for the performance of a burnt 
oblation) or not carried forth, is a great divinity.” 

IX. 319. “Thus, though the Brahmins employ themselves in all (sorts) 
of mean occupation, they must be honoured in every way; (for each of) 
them is a very great deity.” 

Nietzsche’s praise of the Manu Smriti is undeserved. For when he 
says that according to its scheme “the noble classes, the philosophers 
and the warriors guard and guide the masses”, he is either making a 
positively untrue statement or that he has not read it correctly. Under 
the Manu Smriti the superman has rights against the common man but 
he has no duties towards the common man. 

Manu’s degraded and degenerate philosophy of Superman as compared 
with that of Nietzsche is therefore far more odious and loathsome than 
the philosophy of Nietzsche. Such is the social order which the Hindus 
regard as a pearl without price and which Mr. Gandhi is proud to offer 
as a gift from the Hindus to the world. 

Another special feature of the Hindu social order relates to the technique 
devised for its preservation. The technique is twofold. 

The first technique is to place the responsibility of upholding and 
maintaining the social order upon the shoulders of the King. Manu does 
this in quite express terms. 

VIII. 410. “The King should order each man of the mercantile class to 
practise trade or money-lending or agriculture and attendance on cattle; 
and each man of the servile class to act in the service of the twice-born.” 

VIII. 418. “With vigilant care should the King exert himself in 
compelling merchants and mechanics to perform their respective duties; 
for, when such men swerve from their duty they throw this world into 
confusion.” 

Manu does not stop with the mete enunciation of the duty of the 
King in this behalf. He wants to ensure that the King shall at all 
times perform his duty to maintain and preserve the established order. 
Manu therefore makes two further provisions. One provision is to make 
the failure of the King to maintain the established order an offence 
for which the King became liable for prosecution and punishment like 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


125 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS UNIQUE FEATURES 125 

a common felon. This would be clear from the following citations from 
Manu: — 

VIII. 335. “Neither a father, nor a preceptor, nor a friend, nor a mother, 
nor a wife, nor a son, nor a domestic priest must be left unpunished by 
the King if they adhere not with firmness to their duty.” 

VIII. 336. “Where another man of lower birth would be fined one 
pana, the King shall be fined a thousand, and he shall give the fine to 
the priests, or cast it into the river, this is a sacred rule.” 

The other provision made by Manu against a King who is either 
negligent or opposed to the established order is to invest the three 
classes, Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas with a right to rise in armed 
rebellion against the King. 

VIII. 348. “The twice-born may take arms, when their duty is obstructed 
by force; and when, in some evil time, a disaster has befallen the twice- 
born classes.” 

The Right of rebellion is given to the three higher classes and not 
to the Shudra. This is very natural. Because it is only the three upper 
classes who would benefit by the maintenance of this system. But 
supposing the Kshatriyas joined the king in destroying the system what 
is to be done? Manu gives the authority to the Brahmins to punish all 
and particularly the Kshatriyas. 

XI. 31. “A priest, who well knows the laws, need not complain to 
the king of any grievous injury; since, even by his own power, he may 
chastise those, who injure him.” 

XI. 32. “His own power, which depends on himself alone, is mightier 
than the royal power, which depends on other men; by his own might, 
therefore, may a Brahmin coerce his foes.” 

XI. 33. “He may use, without hesitation, the powerful charms revealed 
to Atharvan, and by him to Angiras; for speech is the weapon of a 
Brahmin; with that he may destroy his oppressors.” 

IX. 320. “Of a military man, who raises his arm violently on all occasions 
against the priestly class, the priest himself shall be the chastiser; since 
the soldier originally proceeded from the Brahmin.” 

How can the Brahmins punish the Kshatriyas unless they can take 
arms? Manu knows this and therefore allows the Brahmins to arm 
themselves to punish the Kshatriyas. 

XII. 100. “Command of armies, royal authority, power of inflicting 
punishment, and sovereign dominion over all nations, he only well 
deserves, who perfectly understands the Veda Sastra i.e., who is a 
Brahmin.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


126 


126 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The second technique devised for the maintenance and preservation of 
the established order is quite different from the first. Really speaking, 
it is this which constitutes a special feature of the Hindu social order. 

In the wake of the preservation of the social order from violent attack 
it is necessary to bear in mind three considerations. The outbreak of a 
revolution is conditioned by three factors: (1) the existence of a sense 
of wrong; (2) capacity to know that one is suffering from a wrong and 
(3) availability of arms. The second consideration is that there are two 
ways of dealing with a rebellion. One is to prevent a rebellion from 
occuring and the other is to suppress it after it has broken out. The 
third consideration is that whether the prevention of rebellion would 
be feasible or whether the suppression of rebellion would be the only 
method open, would depend upon the rules which govern the three 
pre-requisites of rebellion. 

When the social order denies opportunity to rise, denies right to 
education and denies right to use arms, it is in a position to prevent 
rebellion against the social order. Where on the other hand, a social 
order allows right to education, and permits the use of arms, it cannot 
prevent rebellion by those who suffer wrongs. Its only remedy to 
preserve the social order is by suppression of rebellion by the use of 
force and violence. The Hindu social order has adopted the first method. 
It has fixed the social status of the lower orders for all generations 
to come. Their economic status is also fixed. There being no disparity 
between the two, there is no possibility of a grievance growing up. 
It has denied education to the lower orders. The result is that no 
one is conscious that his low condition is a ground for. grievance. 
If there is any consciousness it is that no one is responsible for the 
low condition. It is the result of fate. Assuming there is a grievance, 
assuming there is consciousness of grievance, there cannot be a 
rebellion by the lower orders against the Hindu social order because 
the Hindu social order denies the masses the right to use arms. 
Other social orders such as those of the Muslims or the Nazis, follow 
the opposite course. They allow equal opportunity to all. They allow 
freedom to acquire knowledge. They allow the right to bear arms and 
take upon themselves the odium of supressing rebellion by force and 
violence. To deny freedom of opportunity, to deny freedom to acquire 
knowledge, to deny the right of arms is a most cruel wrong. Its results 
Manu mutilates and emasculates man. The Hindu social order is not 
ashamed to do this. It has, however, achieved two things. It has found 
the most effective, even though it be the most shameless method of 
preserving the established order. Secondly, notwithstanding the use of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


127 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS UNIQUE FEATURES 127 

most inhuman means of killing manliness, it has given to the Hindus 
the reputation of being very humane people. The Nazis had indeed a 
great deal to learn from the Hindus. If they had adopted the technique 
of suppressing the masses devised by the Hindus they would have 
been able to crush the Jews without open cruelty and would have also 
exhibited themselves as humane masters. 

The third special feature of the Hindu social order is that it is a 
Divine order designed by God himself. As such it is sacred, not open 
to abrogation, amendment, not even to criticism. For the purpose of 
removing any doubt that may be lurking in the minds of anybody about 
the Divine character of the Hindu social order, attention is invited to 
the following verses from the Bhagvat Gita and the Manu Smriti. Shri 
Krishna one of the Hindu Gods, whose word is the Bhagvat Gita says: — 

IV. 13. “1 myself have created the arrangement of the four castes 
(into Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras), consistently 
with the differences in their qualities and actions. It is, I who 
am the Maker of it.” 

XVIII. 41-44. “O, Parantapa! the respective duties of Brahmins 
(priests), Kshatriyas (warriors), Vaishyas (tradesmen) and Shudras 
(menials) have been individually fixed with reference to the 
qualities arising from their inherent natures, that is, from Prakriti. 

The inherently natural duties of a Brahmin are peace, self-restrain, 
religious austerities, cleanliness, quietness, straightforwardness 
(humanity). Knowledge (that is, spiritual knowledge), Vijnana 
(that is Imperial knowledge) and Astikya-budhi (that is belief 
in a future world). The inherently natural duty (karma) of the 
Kshatriya is bravefy, brilliance, courage, intentness, not running 
away from the battle, generosity, and exercising authority (over 
subject people) ‘goraksya’ (that is the business of keeping cattle), 
and vanijya (that is, trade) is the inherently natural duty of the 
Vaishya; and in the same way, service is the inherently natural 
duty of the Shudra.” 

Krishna forbids propaganda against the Hindu social order. He says: — 

III. 26. “As the ignorant act with attachment to action so a 
wise man wishing to keep the people to their duties, should not 
shake the convictions of the ignorant who are attached to action, 
but acting with devotion (himself) should make them apply 
themselves to all action.... A man of perfect knowledge should 
not shake these men of imperfect knowledge in their convictions.” 

When the Hindu social order breaks down, Krishna does not want 
the people to undertake the work of reform. He asks them to leave the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


128 


128 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

task to him. This is evident from the following admonition contained in 
the Bhagvat Gita. Says Krishna : — 

IV. 7-8. “O! Bharata, whenever Righteousness declines and 
Unrighteousness becomes powerful, then I Myself come to birth. I take 
birth in different Yugas for protecting the Righteous and destroying the 
Unrighteous and for establishing Righteousness.” 

It is not only a special feature of the Hindu social order. It is an 
extraordinary feature. An examination of consecrations will show that 
there are instances where society has consecrated inanimate beings and 
inculcated on the minds of its members the religious belief that they 
are sacred. There are cases where stones, rivers, trees are made Gods 
and Goddesses. There are instances where society has consecrated living 
things and inculcated on the minds of its members the religious belief 
that they are sacred. But there are no instances where a particular 
social order has been consecrated by Religion and made sacred. The 
primitive world had its clan order and its tribal order. But the clan or 
the tribal order was only a social order and was never consecrated by 
religion and made sacred and inviolate. The ancient world countries like 
Egypt, Persia, Rome, Greece, etc., each had its social order in which some 
were free and some were slaves, some were citizens, some were aliens, 
some of the race, some of another. This class order again was only a 
social order and was never consecrated by religion and made sacred and 
inviolate. The modern world has its order, in some it is Democracy, in 
some Facism, in some Nazism and in some Bolshevism. But here again 
the order is only social order. It is not consecrated by religion and made 
sacred and inviolate. 

Nowhere his society consecrated its occupations — the ways of getting 
a living. Economic activity has always remained outside the sanctity of 
religion. Hunting society was not without a religion. But Hunting as an 
occupation was not consecrated by religion and made sacred. Pastoral 
society was not without religion. But pastorage was not consecrated by 
religion and made sacred. Farming as an occupation did not become 
consecrated by religion and made sacred. Feudalism with its gradations, 
with its Lords, villains and serfs was a purely social in character. There 
was nothing sacred about it. 

The Hindus are the only people in the world whose social order — the 
relation of man to man is consecrated by religion and made sacred, 
eternal and inviolate. The Hindus are the only people in the world whose 
economic order — the relation of workman to workman, is consecrated by 
religion and made sacred, eternal and inviolate. 

It is not therefore enough to say that the Hindus are a people with 
a sacred code of religion. So are the Zorastrians, Israelites, Christians 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


129 


THE HINDU SOCIAL ORDER : ITS UNIQUE FEATURES 129 

and Muslims. All these have sacred codes. They consecrate beliefs and 
rites and make them sacred. But they do not prescribe, nor do they 
consecrate a particular form of social structure — the relationship between 
man and man in a concrete form — and make it sacred inviolate. The 
Hindus are singular in this respect. This is what has given the Hindu 
social order its abiding strength to defy the ravages of time and the 
onslaught of time. 

The orthodox Hindu will accept this as an accurate description of the 
Hindu social order. It is only the reformer who is likely to demur. He 
would say that since the advent of the British, this is all a description 
of a dead past. One need not be perturbed by this view. For it contains 
a fallacy. It omits to take note of the fact that institutions which have 
died as creeds sometimes continue, nevertheless survive as habits. No 
one can deny that the Hindu social order has become the habit of the 
Hindus and as such is in full force. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


130 


CHAPTER 4 

Symbols of 
Hinduism 


There are 37 pages under this title. The chapter seems incomplete. 
However this relates to the topic No. 7 of the original plan. 
All these pages are tagged along with the pages of “India and 
Communism” into One register. We are reproducing the text of 
this typed copy along with the table of contents written by Dr. 
Ambedkar. 

A photo copy of the plan of a proposed book ‘Can I be 
a Hindu ?’ is also reproduced from the original (moth- 
eaten). — Editors 


Is there anything peculiar in the social organization of the 
Hindus ? An unsophisticated Hindu who is unaware of investigations 
conducted by scholars will say that there is nothing peculiar, 
abnormal or unnatural in the organization of the Hindu society. 
This is quite natural. People who live their lives in isolation are 
seldom conscious of the peculiarities of their ways and manners. 
People have gone on from generation to generation without stopping 
to give themselves a name. But how does the social organization 
of the Hindus strike the outiders, the non-Hindus ? Did it appear 
to them as normal and natural as it appears to the Hindus? 

Megasthenese who came to India as the ambassador of the Greek 
King Seleukos Nickator to the Court of Chandragupta Maurya some 
time about the year 305 B.C. did feel that the social organization 
of the Hindus was of a very strange sort. Otherwise, he would not 
have taken such particular care to describe the peculiar features 
of the Hindu social organization. He has recorded: 

“The population of India is divided into seven parts. The 
philosophers are first in rank, but form the smallest class in point of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


131 


SYMBOLS OF HINDUISM 

number. Their services are employed privately by persons 
who wish to offer sacrifices or perform other sacred rites, and 
also publicly by the kings at what is called the Great Synod, 
wherein at the beginning of the new year all the philosophers 
are gathered together before the king at the gates, when any 
philosopher who may have committed any useful suggestion to 
writing, or observed any means for improving the crops and 
the cattle, or for promoting the public interests, declares it 
publicly. If anyone is detected giving false information thrice, 
the law condemns him to be silent for the rest of his life, but 
he who gives sound advice is exempted from paying any taxes 
or contributions. The second caste consists of the husbandmen, 
who form the bulk of the population, and are in disposition most 
mild and gentle. They are exempted from military service, and 
cultivate their lands undisturbed by fear. They never go to town, 
either to take part in its tumults, or for any other purpose. It 
therefore not unfrequently happens that at the same time, and 
in the same part of the country, men may be seen drawn up in 
array of battle, and fighting at risk of their lives, while other 
men close at hand are ploughing and digging in perfect security, 
having these soldiers to protect them. The whole of the land is 
the property of the king, and the husbandmen till it on condition 
of receiving one-fourth of the produce. 

The third caste consists of herdsmen and hunters, who alone 
are allowed to hunt, and to keep cattle and to sell draught 
animals or let them out on hire. In return for clearing the land 
of wild beasts and fowls which devour the seeds sown in the 
fields, they receive an allowance of grain from the king. They 
lead wandering life and live under tents. 

The fourth class, after herdsmen and hunters, consists of those 
who work at trades, of those who vend wares, and of those who are 
employed in bodily labour. Some of these pay tribute, and render 
to the state certain prescribed services. But the armourmakers 
and shipbuilders receive wages and their victuals from the king, 
for whom alone they work. The general in command of the army 
supplies the soldiers with weapons, and the admiral of the fleet 
lets out ships on hire for the transport both of passengers and 
merchandise. 

The fifth class consists of fighting men, who when not engaged 
in active service, pass their time in idleness and drinking. They 
are maintained at the king’s expense, and hence they are always 
ready, when occasion calls, to take the field, for they carry nothing 
of their own with them but their own bodies. 


131 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


132 


132 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


The sixth class consists of the overseers, to whom is assigned 
the duty of watching all that goes on, and making reports secretly 
to the king. Some are entrusted with the inspection of the city, 
and others with that of the army. The former employ as their 
coadjutors the courtezans of the city, and the latter the courtezans 
of the camp. The ablest and most trustworthy men are appointed 
to fill these offices. 

The seventh class consists of the Councillors and assessors of the 
king. To them belong the highest posts of government, the tribunals 
of justice, and the general administration of public affairs. 

No one is allowed to marry out of his own caste, or to exchange 
one profession or trade for another, or to follow more than one 
business. An exception is made in favour of the philosopher, who 
for his virtue is allowed this privilege.” 

Alberuni who wrote an account of his travels in India some time 
about 1030 AD must have been struck by the peculiarity of the Hindu 
social organization. For he too has not omitted to make a note of it in 
the record of impressions he made. He observed: — 

“The Hindus call their castes varna i.e. colours, and from a 
genealogical point of view they call them jataka i.e., births. These 
castes are from the very beginning only four. 

I. The highest caste are the Brahmins of whom the books of the 
Hindus tell that they were created from the head of Brahma. And 
a Brahma is only another name for the force called nature, and 
the head is the highest part of the animal body, the Brahmana are 
the choice part of the whole genus. Therefore the Hindus consider 
them as the very best of mankind. 

II. The next caste are the Kshatriyas, who were created, as they 
say, from the shoulders and hands of Brahma. Their degree is not 
much below that of the Brahmana. 

III. After them follow the Vaisyas, who were created from the 
thigh of Brahma. 

IV. The Sudras, who were created from his feet. 

Between the latter two classes there is no very great distance. 
Much, however, as these classes differ from each other, they live 
together in the same towns and villages, mixed together in the 
same houses and lodgings. 

After the Sudra follow the people called Antyaja, who render 
various kinds of services, who are not reckoned amongst any caste, 
but only as members of a certain craft or profession. There are eight 
classes of them who freely intermarry with each other, except the 
fuller, shoemaker and weaver, for no others would condescend to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


133 


SYMBOLS OF HINDUISM 

have anything to do with them. These eight guilds are the 
fuller, shoemaker, juggler, the basket and shield maker, the 
sailor, fisherman, the hunter of wild animals and of birds, and 
the weaver. The four castes do not live together with them in 
one and the same place. These guilds live near the villages and 
towns of the four castes, but outside them. 

The people called Hadi, Doma (Domba), Candala, and 
Badhatau (sic) are not reckoned amongst any caste or guild. 
They are occupied with dirty work, like the cleansing of the 
villages and other services. They are considered as one sole 
class, and distinguished only by their occupations. In fact, 
they are considered like illegitimate children; for according 
to general opinion they descend from a Sudra father and a 
Brahmani mother as the children of fornication; therefore they 
are degraded outcaste. 

The Hindus give to every single man of the four castes 
characteristic names, according to their occupations and modes of 
life, eg., the Brahman is in general called by this name as long 
as he does his work staying at home. When he is busy with the 
service of one fire, he is called ishtin; if he serves three fires, he 
is called Agnihotrin; if he besides offers an offering to the fire, 
he is called Dikshita. And as it is with the Brahmana, so is it 
also with the other castes. Of the classes beneath the castes, 
the Hadi are the best spoken of, because they keep themselves 
free from everything unclean. Next follow the Doma, who play 
on the lute and sing. The still lower classes practise as a trade 
killing and the inflicting of judicial punishments. The worst of 
all are the Badhantan, who not only devour the flesh of dead 
animals, but even of dogs and other beasts. 

Each of the four castes, when eating together, must form a 
group of themselves, one group not being allowed to comprise two 
men of different castes. If, further, in the group of the Brahman 
there are two men who live at enmity with each other, and the 
seat of the one is by the side of the other, they make a barrier 
between the two seats by placing a board between them, or by 
spreading a piece of dress, or in some other way; and if there is 
only a line drawn between them, they are considered as separated. 
Since it is forbidden to eat the remains of a meal, every single 
man must have his own food for himself, for if anyone of the 
party who are eating should take of the food from one and the 
same plate, that which remains in the plate becomes, after the 
first eater has taken part, to him who wants to take as the 
second, the remains of the meal as such is forbidden.” 


133 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


134 


134 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Alberuni did not merely content himself with recording what struck 
him as peculiar in the Hindu social organization. He went on to say: — 

“Among the Hindus institutions of this kind abound. We 
Muslims, of course, stand entirely on the other side of the question, 
considering all men as equal, except in piety; and this is the 
greatest obstacle which prevents any approach or understanding 
between Hindus and Muslims.” 

Duarte Barbosa who was a Portuguese official in the service of the 
Portuguese Government in India from 1500 to 1571 has left a record of 
his impressions of Hindu society. This is what struck him in. Speaking 
of the kingdom of Gujerat: 

“And before this kingdom Guzerate fell into the hands of the 
Moors. A certain caste of Heathen whom the Moors called Resbutos 
(Rajputs) dwelt therein, who in those days were the knights and 
wardens of the land, and made war wheresoever it was needful. 
These men kill and eat sheep and fish and all other kinds of 
food; in the mountains there are yet many of the them, where 
they have great villages and obey not the king of Guzarate, but 
rather wage daily war against him; who, do what he may, is yet 
not able to prevail against them, nor will do so, for they are very 
fine horsemen, and good archers, and have besides divers other 
weapons to defend themselves withal against the Moors, on whom 
they make war without ceasing; yet have they no king nor lord 
over them. And in this kingdom there is another sort of Heathen 
whom they call Baneanes, who are great merchants and traders. 

They dwell among the Moors with whom they carry on all their 
trade. This people eat neither flesh nor fish nor anything subject 
to death; they slay nothing, nor are they willing even to see the 
slaughter of any animal; and thus they maintain their idolatry 
and hold it so firmly that it is a terrible thing. For often it is 
so that the Moors take to them live insects or small birds, and 
make as though to kill them in their presence, and the Baneanes 
buy these and ransom them, paying much more than they are 
worth, so that they may save their lives and let them go. And 
if the King or a Governor of the land has any man condemned 
to death, for any crime which he has committed, they gather 
themselves together and buy him from justice, if they are willing 
to sell him, that he may not die. And divers Moorish mendicants 
as well, when they wish to obtain alms from this people, take great 
stones wherewith they beat upon their shoulders and bellies as 
though they would slay themselves before them, to hinder which 
they give them great alms that they may depart in peace. Others 
carry knives with which they slash their arms and legs, and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


135 


SYMBOLS OF HINDUISM 

to these too they give large alms that they may not kill themselves. 
Others go to their doors seeking to kill rats and snakes for them, 
and to them also they give much money that they may not do so. 
Thus they are much esteemed by the Moors. When these Baneanes 
meet with a swarm of ants on the road they shrink back and seek 
for some way to pass without crushing them. And in their houses 
they sup by daylight, for neither by night nor by day will they 
light a lamp, by reason of certain little flies which perish in the 
flame thereof; and if there is any great need of a light by night 
they have a lantern of varnished paper or cloth, so that no living 
thing may find its way in, and die in the flame. And if these men 
breed many lice they kill them not, but when they trouble them 
too much they send for certain men, also Heathen, who living 
among them and whom they hold to be men of a holy life, they 
are like hermits living with great abstinence through devotion 
to their gods. These men house them, and as many lice as they 
catch they place on their own heads and breed them on their own 
flesh, by which they say they do great service to their Idol. Thus 
one and all they maintain with great self restraint their law of 
not killing. On the other hand they are great usurers, falsifiers 
of weights and measures and many other goods and of coins; and 
great liars. These Heathen are tawny men, tail and well-looking 
gaily attired, delicate and moderate in their food. Their diet is of 
milk, butter, sugar and rice, and many conserves of divers sorts. 
They make much use of dishes of fruit and vegetables and pot 
herbs in their food. Wheresoever they dwell they have orchards 
and fruit gardens and many water tanks wherein they bathe 
twice a day, both men and women; and they say when they have 
finished bathing that they are clear of as many sins as they have 
committed up to that hour. These Baneanes grow very long hair, 
as women do with us, and wear it twisted up on the head and 
made into a knot, and over it a turban, that they may keep it 
always held together; and in their hair they put flowers and other 
sweet scented things. 

They use to annoint themselves with white sandalwood mixed 
with saffron and other scents. They are very amorous people. They 
are clad in long cotton and silken shirts and are shod with pointed 
shoes of richly wrought cordwain; some of them wear short coats 
of silk and brocade. They carry no arms except certain very small 
knives ornamented with gold and silver, and this for two reasons; 
first because they are men who make but little use of weapons; 
and secondly, because the Moors defend them.” 

And there is here another class of Heathen whom they call 
Brahmenes, who are priests among them and persons who manage 


135 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


136 


136 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and rule their houses of prayer and idol-worship, which are of 
great size and have great revenues; and many of them also are 
maintained by alms. In these houses are great numbers of wooden 
Idols, and others of stone and copper and in these houses or 
monasteries they celebrate great ceremonies in honour of these 
idols, entertaining them with great store of candles and oil lamps, 
and with bells after our fashion. These Brahmans and Heathen 
have in their creed many resemblances to the Holy Trinity, 
and hold in great honour the relation of the Triune Three, and 
always make their prayers to God, whom they confess and adore 
as the true God, Creator and maker of all things, who is three 
persons and one God, and they say that there are many other 
Gods who are rulers under him, in whom also they believe. These 
Brahmans and Heathen wheresoever they find our churches enter 
them and make prayers and adorations to our Images, always 
asking for Santa Maria, like men who have some knowledge and 
understanding of these matters and they honour the Church as 
is our manner, saying that between them and us there is little 
difference. These men never eat anything subject to death, nor 
do they slay anything. Bathing they hold to be a great ceremony 
and they say that by it they are saved.” 

Speaking of the Kingdom of Calicut, Barbosa says: — 

“There is also in this same kingdom of Calicut a caste of people 
called Brahmenes who are priests among them (as are the clergy 
among us) of whom 1 have spoken in another place.” 

“These all speak the same tongue, nor can any be a Brahmene 
except he be the son of a Brahmene. When they are seven years 
of age they put over their shoulder a strip of two fingers in 
breadth of untanned skin with the hair on it of a certain wild 
beast which they call Cryvamergam, which resembles a wild 
ass. Then for seven years he must not eat betel for which time 
he continues to wear this strap. When he is fourteen years old 
they make him a Brahmene, and taking off their leather strip 
they invest him with the cord of three strands which he wears 
for the rest of his life as a token that he is a Brahmene. And 
this they do with great ceremonial and rejoicings, as we do here 
for a cleric when he sings his first mass. Thereafter he may eat 
betel, but no flesh or fish. They have great honour among the 
Indians, and as I have already said, they suffer death for no cause 
whatsoever, their own headman gives them a mild chastisement. 
They marry once only in our manner, and only the eldest son 
marries, he is treated like the head of an entailed estate. The 
other brothers remain single all their lives. These Brahmenes 
keep their wives well guarded, and greatly honoured, so that no 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


137 


SYMBOLS OF HINDUISM 

other man may sleep with them; if any of them die, they do not 
marry again, but if a woman wrongs her husband she is slain 
by poison. The brothers who remain bachelors sleep with the 
Nayre women, they hold it to be a great honour, and as they 
are Bramenes no woman refuses herself to them, yet they may 
not sleep with any woman older than themselves. They dwell in 
their own houses and cities, and serve as clergy in the houses 
of worship, whither they go to pray at certain hours of the day, 
performing their rituals and idolatries.” 

“Some of these Brahmenes serve the kings in every manner 
except in arms. No man may prepare any food for the King 
except a Brahmene or his own kin; they also serve as couriers 
to other countries with letters, money or merchandise, passing 
wherever they wish to go in safety and none does them any ill, 
even when the kings are at war. These Brahmenes are learned 
in their idolatry and possess many books thereof. The Kings hold 
them in high esteem.” 

“I have already spoken many times of the Naiyars and yet I 
have not hitherto told you what manner of men they are. You 
are to know that in this land of Malabar there is another caste 
of people called Nayars and among them are noble men who have 
no other duty than to serve in war, and they always carry their 
arms withersoever they go, some swords and shields, others bows 
and arrows, and yet others spears. They all live with the King, 
and the other great Lords; nevertheless all receive stipends from 
the King or from the great Lords with whom they dwell. None 
may become a Nayar, save only he who is of Nayar lineage. 
They are very free from stain in their nobility. They will not 
touch anyone of low caste. Nor eat nor drink save in the house 
of a Nayar. These men are not married, their nephews (sister’s 
sons) are their heirs. The Nayar women of good birth are very 
independent, and dispose of themselves as they please with 
Brahmenes and Nayars, but they do not sleep with men of caste 
lower than their own under pain of death. When they reach 
the age of twelve years their mothers hold a great ceremony. 
When a mother perceives that her daughter has attained that 
age, she asks her kinsfolk and friends to make ready to honour 
her daughter, then she asks of the kindred and especially of 
one particular kinsman or great friend to marry her daughter; 
this he willingly promises and then he has a small jewel made, 
which would contain a half ducat of gold, long like a ribbon, 
with a hole through the middle which comes out on the other 
side, strung on a thread of white silk. The mother then on a 
fixed day is present with her daughter gaily decked with many 
rich jewels, making great rejoicings with music and singing, and 


137 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


138 


138 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a great assembly of people. Then the kinsmen or friend comes 
bringing that jewel, and going through certain forms, throws it over 
the girl’s neck. She wears it as a token all the rest of her life, and 
may then dispose of herself as she wills. The man departs without 
sleeping with her inasmuch as he is her kinsman; if he is not, he 
may sleep with her, but is not obliged to do so. Thenceforward the 
mother goes about searching and asking some young men to take 
her daughter’s virginity; they must be Nayars and they regard it 
among themselves as a disgrace and a foul thing to take a woman’s 
virginity. And when anyone has once slept with her, she is fit for 
association with men. Then the mother again goes about enquiring 
among other young Nayars if they wish to support her daughter, 
and take her as a Mistress so that three or four Nayars agree 
with her to keep her, and sleep with her, each paying her so much 
a day; the more lovers she has the greater is her honour. Each 
of one of them passes a day with her from midday on one day 
till midday on the next day and so they continue living quietly 
without any disturbance or quarrels among them. If any of them 
wishes to leave her, he leaves her, and takes another and she 
also if she is weary of a man, she tells him to go, and he does 
go, or makes terms with her. Any children they may have stay 
with the mother who has to bring them up, for they hold them 
not to be the children of any man, even if they bear his likeness, 
and they do not consider them their children, nor are they heirs 
to their estates, for as I have already stated their heirs are 
their nephews, sons of their sisters, (which rule whosoever will 
consider inwardly in his mind will find that it was established 
with a greater and deeper meaning than the common folk think) 
for they say that the Kings of the Nayars instituted it in order 
that the Nayars should not be held back from their service by 
the burden and labour of rearing children.” 

“In this kingdom of Malabar there is also another caste of 
people whom they call Biabares, Indian Merchants, natives of 
the land. They deal in goods of every kind both in the seaports 
and inland, wheresoever their trade is of most profit. They gather 
to themselves all the pepper and ginger from the Nayars and 
husbandmen and offtimes they buy the new crops beforehand in 
exchange for cotton clothes and other goods which they keep at 
the seaports. Afterwards they sell them again and gain much 
money thereby. Their privileges are such that the king of the 
country in which they dwell cannot execute them by legal process.” 

“There is in this land yet another caste of folk known as 
Cuiavem. They do not differ from the Nayars, yet by reason of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


139 


SYMBOLS OF HINDUISM 

a fault which they committed, they remain separate from them. 
Their business is to make pottery and bricks for roofing the houses 
of the Kings and idols, which are roofed with bricks instead of 
tiles; only these, for as I have already said, other houses are 
thatched with branches. They have their own sort of idolatry, 
and their separate idols.” 

“There is another Heathen caste which they call Mainatos, 
whose occupation is to wash clothes for the Kings, Brahmenes 
and Nayars. By this they live, and may not take up any other.” 

“There is another lower caste than these which they call Caletis, 
who are weavers who have no other way of earning save by weaving 
of cotton and silk clothes, but they are low caste folk and have 
but little money, so that they clothe the lower races. They are 
apart by themselves and have their own idolatry.” 

“Besides the castes mentioned above, there are eleven others 
lower than they with whom the others do not associate, nor do’ they 
touch them under pain of death; and there are great distinctions 
between one and another of them, preserving them from mixture 
with one another. The purest of all these low, simple folk they 
call Tuias. Their work is mainly that of tending the palm-groves 
and gathering the fruit thereof, and carrying it away for wages 
on their backs, for there are no beasts of burden in the land.” 

“There is another caste still lower than these whom they call 
Manen (Mancu in the printed text) who neither associate with 
others nor touch them, nor do the other touch them. They are 
washermen for the common people, and makers of sleeping mats 
from which occupations all but they are barred; their sons must 
perforce follow the same trade; they have their own separate 
idolatry.” 

“There is another caste in this land still lower whom they call 
Canaquas. Their trade is making buckles and umbrellas. They 
learn letters for purposes of astronomy, they are great astrologers, 
and foretell with great truth things that are to come; there are 
some lords who maintain them for this cause.” 

“There is also another lower caste, also Heathens, called Ageres. 
They are masons, carpenters, smiths, metal workers and some are 
goldsmiths, all of whom are of a common descent, and a separate 
caste, and have their idols apart from other folk. They marry, and 
their sons inherit their property, and learn their fathers’ trade.” 

“There is another caste still lower in this country called Mogeres, 
they are almost the same as the Tuias, but they do not touch one 
another. They work as carriers of all things belonging to the Royal 


139 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


140 


140 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

State when it moves from one place to another, but there are very 
few of them in this land; they are a separate caste; they have no 
marriage law; the most of them gain their living on the sea, they 
are sailors, and some of them fishers; they have no Idols. They 
are as well slaves of the Nayars: 

“There is another caste yet lower whom they call Monquer, 
fishers who have no other work than fishing, yet some sail in the 
Moors’ ship and in those of other Heathens, and they are very 
expert seamen. This race is very rude, they are shameless thieves; 
they marry and their sons succeed them, their women are of loose 
character, they sleep with anyone whosoever and it is held no evil. 
They have their own idolatry.” 

“In this land of Malabar there is another caste of Heathen even 
lower than those, whom, they call Betunes. Their business is salt- 
making and rice growing, they have no other livelihood.” 

“They dwell in houses standing by themselves in the fields 
away from the roads, whither the gentlefolk do not walk. They 
have their own idolatry. They are slaves of the Kings and Nayars 
and pass their lives in poverty. The Nayars make them walk far 
away from them and speak to them from a far off. They hold no 
intercourse with any other caste.” 

“There is another caste of Heathen, even lower and ruder, 
whom they call Paneens, who are great sorcerers and live by no 
other means.” 

“There is another caste lower and ruder than they, named 
Revoleens a very poor folk, who live by carrying firewood and 
grass to the towns, they may touch none, nor may any touch them 
under pain of death. They go naked, covering only their private 
parts with scant and filthy rags,, the more part of them indeed 
with leaves of certain trees. Their women wear many brass rings 
in their ears; and on their necks, arms and legs, necklaces and 
bracelets of heads.” 

“And there is yet another caste of Heathens lower than these 
whom they call Poleas, who among all the rest are held to be 
accursed and excommunicate; they dwell in the fields and open 
campaigns in secret lurking places, whither folk of good caste never 
go save by mischance, and live in huts very strait and mean. They 
are tillers of rice with buffaloes and oxen. They never speak to the 
Nayars save from a far off, shouting so that they may hear them, 
and when they go along the roads they utter loud cries that they 
may be let past, and whosoever hears them leaves the road, and 
stands in the wood till they have passed by; and if anyone whether 
man or woman, touches them, his kinsfolk slay them forthwith, and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


141 


SYMBOLS OF HINDUISM 


141 


in vengeance therefore they slay Poleas until they are weary 
without suffering any punishment.” 

“Yet another caste there is even lower and baser called Parens, 
who dwell in the most desert places away from all other castes. 

They have no intercourse with any person nor anyone with them; 
they are held to be worse than devils, and to be damned. Even to 
see them is to be unclean and outcaste. They eat yams and other 
roots of wild plants. They cover their middles with leaves, they 
also eat the flesh of wild beasts.” 

“With these end the distinctions between the castes of the 
Heathen, which are eighteen in all, each one separate and unable 
to touch others or marry with them; and besides these eighteen 
castes of the Heathen who are natives of Malabar, which I have 
now related to you, there are others of outlandish folk merchants 
and traders in the land, where they possess houses and estates, 
living like the natives yet with customs of their own.” 

These foreigners were not able to give a full and detailed picture of 
caste. This is understandable. For to every foreigner the private life of 
the Hindu is veiled and it is not possible for him to penetrate it. The 
social organism of India, the play of its motive forces, is moreover, 
regulated infinitely more by custom, carrying according to locality and 
baffling in its complexity, than by any legal formula which can be 
picked out of a legal text book. But there is no doubt that caste did 
appear to the foreigner as the most singular and therefore the most 
distinguishing feature of Hindu society. Otherwise they would not have 
noted its existence in the record they made of what they observed when 
they came to India. 

Caste therefore is something special in the Hindu social organization 
and marks off the Hindus from other peoples. Caste has been a growing 
institution. It has never been the same at all times. The shape and form 
of Caste as it existed when Megashthenes wrote his account was very 
different from what the shape and form it had taken when Alberuni 
came and the appearance it gave to the Portuguese was different from 
what it was in the time of Alberuni, But to understand caste one must 
have more exact idea of its nature than these foreigners are able to give. 

To follow the discussion of the subject of caste it is necessary to 
familiarize the reader with some basic conceptions which underlie 
the Hindu Social Organization. The basic conception of social 
organization which prevails among the Hindus starts with the rise of 
four classes or Varnas into which Hindu society is believed to have 
become divided. These four classes were named (1) Brahmins, the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


142 


142 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

priestly and the educated class (2) Kshatriyas the military class (3) 
The Vaishyas the trading class and (4) The Shudras the servant class. 
For a time these were merely classes. After a time what were only 
classes (Varnas) became Castes (Jatis) and the four castes became 
four thousand. In this way the modern caste system was only the 
evolution of the ancient Varna system. 

No doubt the caste system is an evolution of the Varna system. 
But one can get no diea of the caste system by a study of the Varna 
system. Caste must be studied apart from Varna. 

II 

An old agnostic is said to have summed up his philosophy in the 
following words: — 

“The only thing I know is that I know nothing; and I am not quite 

sure that I know that” 

Sir Denzil Ibbetson undertaking to write about caste in the Punjab 
said that the words of these agnostic about his philosophy expressed 
very exactly his own feelings regarding caste. It is no doubt true that 
owing to local circumstances there does appear a certain diversity 
about caste matters and that it is very difficult to make any statement 
regarding any one of the castes. Absolutely true as it may be, as 
regards one locality which will not be contradicted with equal truth 
as regards the same caste in some other area. 

Although this may be true yet it cannot be difficult to separate the 
essential and fundamental features of caste from its non-essential 
and superficial features. An easy way to ascertain this is to ask 
what are the matters for which a person is liable to be excluded 
from caste. Mr, Bhattacharya has stated the following as causes for 
expulsion from caste. (1) Embracing Christanity or Islam (2) Going 
to Europe or America (3) Marrying a widow (4) Publicly throwing 
the sacred thread (5) Publicly eating beef, pork or fowl (6) Publicly 
eating kachcha food prepared by a Mahomedan, Christian or low 
caste Hindu (7) Officiating at the house of a very low caste Shudra 
(8) By a female going away from home for immoral purposes (9) By a 
widow becoming pregnant. This list is not exhaustive and omits the 
three most important causes which entail expulsion from caste. They 
are (10) Intermarrying outside caste (11) Interdining with persons 
of another caste and (12) Change of occupation. The second defect 
in the statement of Mr. Bhattacharya is that it does not make any 
distinction between essentials and non-essentials. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


143 


SYMBOLS OF HINDUISM 143 

Of course, when a perosn is expelled from his caste the penalty is 
uniform. His friends, relatives and fellowmen refuse to partake of his 
hospitality. He is not invited to entertainments in their houses. He 
cannot obtain brides or bridegrooms for his children. Even his married 
daughters cannot visit him without running the risk of being exlcuded 
from caste. His priest, his barber and washerman refuse to serve him. 
His fellow castemen severe their connection with him so completely 
that they refuse to assist him even at the funeral of a member of his 
household. In some cases the man excluded from caste is debarred access 
to public temples and to the cremation or burial ground. 

These reasons for expulsion from caste indirectly show the rules and 
regulations of the caste. But all regulations are not fundamental. There 
are many which are unessential. Caste can exist even without them. 
The essential and unessential can be distinguished by asking another 
question. When can a Hindu who has lost caste regain his caste ? The 
Hindus have a system of Prayaschitas which are Penances and which 
a man who has been expelled from caste must perform before he can 
be admitted to caste fellowship. With regard to these Prayaschitas or 
Penances certain points must be remembered. In this first place, there 
are caste offences for which there is no Prayaschita. In the second 
place, the Prayaschitas vary according to the offence. In some cases the 
Prayaschitas involve a very small penalty. In other cases the penalty 
involved is a very severe one. 

The existence of a Prayaschita and the absence of it have a significance 
which must be clearly understood. The absence of Prayaschita does 
not mean that anyone may commit the offence with impunity. On the 
contrary it means that the offence is of an immeasurable magnitude 
and the offender once expelled is beyond reclamation. There is no re- 
entry for him in the caste from which he is expelled. The existence of a 
Prayaschita means that the offence is compoundable. The offender can 
take the prescribed Prayaschita and obtain admission in the caste from 
which he is expelled. 

There are two offences for which there is no penance. These are (1) 
change from Hindu Religion to another religion (2) Marriage with a 
person of another caste or another religion. It is obvious if a man loses 
caste for these offences he loses it permanently. 

Of the other offences the prayaschitas prescribed are of the severest 
kind, are two — (1) interdining with a person of another caste or a non- 
Hindu and (2) Taking to occupation which is not the occupation of the 
caste. In the case of the other offences the penalty is a light one almost 
nominal. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


144 


144 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The surest clue to find out what are the fundamental rules of caste and 
what caste consists it is furnished by the rules regarding prayaschitas. 
Those for the infringement of which there is no prayaschita constitute 
the very soul of caste and those for the infringement of which the 
prayaschita is of the severest kind make up the body of caste. It may 
therefore be said without any hesitation that there are four fundamental 
rules of caste. A caste may be defined as a social group having (a) belief 
in Hindu Religion and bound by certain regulations as to (b) marriage 
(c) food and (d) occupation. To this one more characteristic may be added 
namely a social group having a common name by which it is recognized. 

In the matter of marriage the regulation lays down that the caste 
must be endogamous. There can be no intermarriage between members 
of different castes. This is the first and the most fundamental idea on 
which the whole fabric of the caste is built up. 

In the matter of food the rule, is that a person cannot take food from 
and dine with any person who does not belong to his caste. This means 
that only those who can intermarry can also interdine. Those who cannot 
intermarry cannot interdine. In other words, caste is an endogamous 
unit and also a communal unit. 

In the matter of occupation the regulation is that a person must follow 
the occupation which is the traditional occupation of his caste and if the 
caste has no occupation then he should follow the occupation of his father. 

In the matter of status of a person it is fixed and is hereditary. It is 
fixed because a person’s status is determined by the status of the caste 
to which he belongs. It is hereditary because a Hindu is stamped with 
the caste to which his parents belonged, a Hindu cannot change his 
status because he cannot change his caste. A Hindu is bom in a caste 
and he dies a member of the caste in which he is born. A Hindu may 
lose his status if he loses caste. But he cannot acquire a new or a better 
or different status. 

What is the significance of a common name for a caste? The significance 
of this will be clear if we ask two questions which are very relevant and a 
correct answer to each is necessary for a complete idea of this institution 
of caste. Social groups are either organized or unorganized. When the 
membership of the group and the process of joining and leaving the groups, 
are the subject of definite social regulations and involve certain duties and 
privileges in relation to other members of the group then the group is an 
organized group. A group is a voluntary group in which members enter with 
a full knowledge of what they are doing and the aims which the association 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


145 


SYMBOLS OF HINDUISM 145 

is designed to fulfil. On the other hand, there are groups of which an 
individual person becomes a member without any act of volition, and 
becomes subject to social regulation and traditions over which he has 
no control of any kind. 

Now it is hardly necessary to say that caste is a highly organized 
social grouping. It is not a loose or a floating body. Similarly, it is not 
necessary to say that caste is an involuntary grouping. A Hindu is born 
in a caste and he dies as a member of that caste. There is no Hindu 
without caste, cannot escape .caste and being bounded by caste from 
birth to death he becomes subject to social regulations and traditions 
of the caste over which he has no control. 

The significance of a separate name for a caste lies in this — namely it 
makes caste an organized and an involuntary grouping. A separate and 
a distinctive name for a caste makes caste asking to a corporation with 
a perpetual existence and a seal of separate entity. The significance of 
separate names for separate castes has not been sufficiently realized by 
writers on caste. In doing that they have lost sight of a most distinctive 
feature of caste. Social groups there are and they are bound to be in 
every society. Many social groups in many countries can be equated to 
various castes in India and may be regarded as their equivalent. Potters, 
Washermen, Intellectuals as social groups are everywhere. But in other 
countries they have remained as unorganized and voluntary groups 
while in India they have become organized and involuntary i.e, they 
have become castes because in other countries the social groups were 
not given name while in India they did. It is the name which the caste 
bears which gives it fixity and continuity and individuality. It is the name 
which defines who are its members and in most cases a person born in 
a caste carries the name of the caste as a part of his surname. Again it 
is the name which makes it easy for the caste to enforce its rules and 
regulations. It makes it easy in two ways. In the first place, the name 
of the caste forming a surname of the individual prevents the offender 
in passing off as a person belonging to another caste and thus escape 
the jurisdiction of the caste. Secondly, it helps to identify the offending 
individual and the caste to whose jurisdiction he is subject so that he is 
easily handed up and punished for any breach of the caste rules. 

This is what caste means. Now as to the caste system. This involves 
the study of the mutual relations between different castes. Looked at as 
a collection of caste, the caste system presents several features which at 
once strike the observer. In the first place there is no inter-connection 
between the various castes which form a system. Each caste is separate 
and distinct. It is independent and sovereign in the disposal of its 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


146 


146 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

internal affairs and the enforcement of caste regulations. The castes 
touch but they do not interpenetrate. The second feature relates to the 
order in which one caste stands in relation to the other castes in the 
system. That order is vertical and not horizontal. 

Such is the caste and such is the caste system. Question is, is this 
enough to know the Hindu social organization? For a static conception of 
the Hindu social organization an idea of the caste and the caste system 
is enough. One need not trouble to remember more than the facts that 
the Hindus are divided into castes and that the castes form a system 
in which all hang on a thread which runs through the system in such 
a way that while encircling and separating one caste from another it 
holds them all as though it was a string of tennis balls hanging one 
above the other. Bm this will not be enough to understand caste as a 
dynamic phenomenon. To follow the workings of caste in action it is 
necessary to note one other feature of caste besides the caste system, 
namely class-caste system. 

The relationship between the ideas of caste and class has been a 
matter of lively controversy. Some say that caste is analogous to class 
and that there is no difference between the two. Others hold that the 
idea of castes is fundamentally opposed to that of class. This is an 
aspect of the subject of caste about which more will be said hereafter. 
For the present it is necessary to emphasize one feature of the caste 
system which has not been referred to hereinbefore. It is this. Although 
caste is different from and opposed to the notion of class yet the caste- 
system — as distinguished from caste — recognizes a class system which 
is somewhat different from the graded status referred to above. Just 
as the Hindus are divided into so many castes, castes are divided into 
different classes of castes. The Hindu is caste-conscious. He is also class 
conscious. Whether he is caste conscious or class conscious depends upon 
the caste with which he comes in conflict. If the caste with which he 
comes in conflict is a caste within the class to which he belongs he is 
caste conscious. If the caste is outside the class to which he belongs he 
is class conscious. Anyone who needs any evidence on this point may 
study the Non-Brahmin Movement in the Madras and the Bombay 
Presidency. Such a study will leave no doubt that to a Hindu caste 
periphery is as real as class periphery and caste consciousness is as 
real as class consciousness. 

Caste, it is said, is an evolution of the Varna system. I will show 
later on that this is nonsense. Caste is a perversion of Varna. At 
any rate it is an evolution in the opposite direction. But while caste 
has completely perverted the Varna system it has borrowed the class 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


147 


SYMBOLS OF HINDUISM 147 

system from the Varna system. Indeed the Class-caste system follows 
closely the class clevages of the Varna system. 

Looking at the caste system from this point of view one comes across 
several lives of class clevage which run through this pyramid of castes 
dividing the pyramid into blocks of castes. The first line of clevage 
follows the line of division noticeable in the ancient Chaturvarna 
system. The old system of Chaturvarna made a distinction between 
the first three Varnas, the Brahmins, Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and the 
fourth Varna namely the Shudra. The three former were classes as the 
Regenerate classes. The Shudra was held as the Unregenerate class. 
This distinction was based upon the fact that the former were entitled to 
wear the sacred thread and study the Vedas. The Shudra was entitled 
to neither and that is why he was regarded as the unregenerate class. 
This line of clevage is still in existence and forms the basis of the 
present day class division separating the castes which have grown out 
of the vast class of Shudras from those which have grown out of the 
three classes of Brahmins, the Kshatriyas and Vaishyas. This line of 
class clevage is the one which is expressed by the terms High Castes 
and Low Castes and which are short forms for the High Class Castes 
and Low Class Castes. 

Next after this line of clevage there runs through the pyramid a 
second line of class clevage. It runs just below the Low Class Castes. 
It sets above all the castes born out of the four Varnas i.e., the High 
Castes as well as the low castes above the remaining castes which 1 will 
merely describe as the ‘rest’. This line of class clevage is again a real 
one and follows the well-defined distinction which was a fundamental 
principle of the Chaturvarna system. The Chaturvarna system as is 
pointed out made a distinction between the four Varnas putting the 
three Varnas above the fourth. But it also made an equally clear 
distinction between those within the Chaturvarna and those outside 
the Chaturvarna. It had a terminology to express this distinction. 
Those within the Chaturvarna — high or low, Brahmin or Shudra were 
called Savarna i.e., those with the stamp of the Varna. Those outside 
the Chaturvarna were called Avarna i.e., those without the stamp of 
Varna. All the castes which have evolved out of the four varnas are 
called Savarna Hindus — which is rendered English by the term Caste 
Hindus — The ‘rest’ are the A varnas who in present parlance spoken 
of by Europeans as Non-caste Hindus i.e., those who are outside the 
four original castes or varnas. 

Much that is written about the caste system has reference mostly 
to the caste-system among the Savarna Hindus. Very little is known 
about the Avarna Hindus. Who are these Avarna Hindus, what is their 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


148 


148 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

position in Hindu Society, how are they related to the Savarna Hindus 
are questions to which no attention has so far been paid. I am sure that 
without considering these questions no one can get a true picture of the 
social structure the Hindus have built. To leave out the Class clevage 
between the Savarna Hindus and the Avarna Hindus is to relate Grimm’s 
Fairy Tale which leaves out the witches, the goblins and the orges. 

The Avarna Hindus comprise three 


(INCOMPLETE) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


149 


Part III 


Revolution and 
Counter-Revolution 
in Ancient India 


Dr. B. R. Ambedkar had proposed to write a treatise, 
i.e., Revolution and Counter’ Revolution in Ancient 
India’. The table of contents has been printed in the 
chapter of schemes. He had originally planned to 
write seven books to be included under this broad 
title. The Committee was able to find some pages and 
few chapters in his collection. The chapters are also 
incomplete. After scrutiny, the Committee came to a 
decision that Revolution and Counter-Revolution in 
Ancient India’ is to be presented in this volume with the 
available material though incomplete. Dr. Ambedkar 
considered the rise of Buddhism as revolution. The 
Counter-Revolution pioneered by Brahmins 1 resulted 
into decline and fall of Buddhism. 


Contd. overleaf 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-02.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


150 


As such the following chapters are included under 
this title. 

I. Ancient India on Exhumation 

2 The Ancient Regime — The State of the 
Aryan Society 

3. A Sunken Priesthood 

4. Reformers and Their Fate 

5. The Decline and Fall of Buddhism 

6. The Literature of Brahminism 

7. Triumph of Brahminism 

8. The Morals of the House — Manusmruti 
or the Gospel of Counter-Revolution 

9. Philosophic Defence of Counter- 
Revolution (Krishna and his Gita) 

1 0. Analysis of Virat Parva and Uddyog Parva 

II. Brahmins V/s Kshatriyas 

12. The Shudras and the Counter-Revolution 

13. The Women and the Counter-Revolution 

The readers may compare these chapters with 
the proposed plan given in the last chapters of 
Schemes. — Editors 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\vo!3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


151 


CHAPTER 5 

Ancient India On Exhumation 

There are two typed copies of this Chapter. Both of them contain 
additions and corrections in the handwriting of Dr. Babasaheh 
Ambedkar. After consideration, we decided that the latter 
version should be included here. This essay, consisting of three 
pages only, seems to be an introduction to a larger subject Dr. 
Ambedkar probably had in his mind. — Editors, 

Much of the ancient history of India is no history at all. Not that 
ancient India has no history. It has plenty of it. But it has lost its 
character. It has been made mythology to amuse women and children. 
This seems to have been done deliberately by the Brahminical writers. 
Take the word Deva. What does it mean? Is the word Jana Vishesh 
represent a member of the human family? It is made to appear 
superhuman agency. By this the pith of history contained in it is 
squeezed out. 

Along with the word Deva occur the names of Yaksha, Gana, 
Gandharva, Kinnars. Who were they? The imperession one gets on 
reading the Mahabharat and Ramayan is that they are imaginary 
beings who filled the horizon but did not exist. 

But the Yaksha, Gana, Gandharva, Kinnaras were also members 
of the human family. They were in the service of the Devas. The 
Yakshas were guarding the palaces. Ganas were guarding the Devas. 
Gandharvas were amusing the Devas by music and dancing. The 
Kinnaras were also in the service of the Gods. The descendants of 
the Kinnaras are even now living in Himachal Pradesh. 

Take the name Asura. The description of Asura given, in the 
Mahabharat and Ramayana make out as though they belonged to non- 
human world. An Asura is described to eat ten carts-load of food. They 
are monsters in size. They sleep for six months. They have ten mouths. 
Who is a Rakshas? He too is described as a non-human creature. In size, 
in his capacity for eating, in his habits of life he resembled the Asura. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


152 


152 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

There is a plenty of references to the Nagas. But who is a Naga? A 
Naga is represented as a serpent or a snake. Can this be true ? Whether 
true or not, it is so and Hindus believe it. Ancient Indian history must 
be exhumed. Without its exhumation Ancient India will go without 
history. Fortunately with the help of the Buddhist literature, Ancient 
Indian History can be dug out of the debris which the Brahmin writers 
have heaped upon in a fit of madness. 

The Buddhist literature helps a great deal to remove the debris and 
see the underlying substance quite clearly and distinctly. 

The Buddhist literature shows that the Devas were a community of 
human beings. There are so many Devas who come to the Buddha to 
have their doubts and difficulties removed. How could this be unless the 
Devas were human beings. 

Again the Buddhist canonical literature throws a flood of light on the 
puzzling question of the Nagas. It makes a distinction between womb- 
born Nagas and egg-born Nagas and thereby making it clear that the 
word Naga has two-fold meaning. In its original sense it stood for the 
name of a human community. 

The Asuras again are not monsters. They too are a Jan-Vishesh 
human beings. According to Satpatha Bramhana, the Asuras are the 
descendants of Prajapati the Lord of the creation. How they became evil 
spirits is not known. But the fact is recorded that they fought against 
the Devas for the possession of the earth and that they were overcome 
by the Devas and that they finally succumbed. The point is clear that 
the Asuras were members of the human family and not monsters. 

With this exhumation of debris, we can see Ancient Indian History 
in a new light. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\vo!3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


153 


CHAPTER 6 

The Ancient Regime: 

The State of the Aryan Society 


This essay consists of 11 typed foolscap pages tagged into a 
file. From the last sentence it appears that the Chapter is 
incomplete. — Editors 

I 

Buddhism was a revolution. It was as great a Revolution as the 
French Revolution. Though it began as a Religious revolution, it 
became more than Religious revolution. It became a Social and Political 
Revolution. To be able to realize how profound was the character of 
this Revolution, it is necessary to know the state of the society before 
the revolution began its course. To use the language of the French 
Revolution, it is necessary to have a picture of the ancient regime 
in India. 

To understand the great reform which he brought about by his 
teaching, it is necessary to have some idea of the degraded condition 
of the Aryan civilization at the time when Buddha started on the 
mission of his life. 

The Aryan Community of his time was steeped in the worst kind 
of debauchery; social, religious and spiritual. 

To mention only a few of the social evils, attention may be drawn 
to gambling. Gambling had become as widespread among the Aryans 
as drinking. 

Every king had a hall of gambling attached to his palace. Every 
king had an expert gambler in his employment as a companion to play 
with. King Virat had in his employment Kank as an expert gambler. 
Gambling was not merely a pastime with kings. They played with 
heavy stakes. They staked kingdoms, dependents, relatives, slaves, 
servants. 1 King Nala staked everything in gambling with Paskkar and 
lost everything. The only thing he did not stake was himself and his 


Mahabharat — Vanaparva. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


154 


154 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

wife Damayanti. Nala had to go and live in the forest as a beggar. 
There were kings who went beyond Nala. The Mahabharat 1 tells how 
Dharma the eldest of the Pandavas gambled and staked everything, his 
brothers and also his and their wife Draupadi. Gambling was a matter 
of honour with the Aryans and any invitation to gamble was regarded 
as an injury to one’s honour and dignity. Dharma gambled with such 
disastrous consequences although he was warned beforehand. His excuse 
was that he was invited to gamble and that as a man of honour, he 
could not decline such an invitation. 

This vice of gambling was not confined to kings. It had infected even 
the common folk. Rig-Veda contains lamentations of a poor Aryan ruined 
by gambling. The habit of gambling had become so common in Kautilya’s 
time that there were gambling houses licensed by the king from which 
the king derived considerable revenue. 

Drinking was another evil which was rampant among the Aryans. 
Liquors were of two sorts Soma and Sura. Soma was a sacrificial 
wine. The drinking of the Soma was in the beginning permitted only 
to Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas. Subsequently it was permitted 
only to Brahmins and Kshatriyas. The Vaishyas were excluded from it 
and the Shudras were never permitted to taste it. Its manufacture was 
a secret known only to the Brahmins. Sura was open to all and was 
drunk by all. The Brahmins also drank Sura. Shukracharya the priest 
to the Asuras drank so heavily that in his drunken state he gave the 
life giving Mantra known to him only and with which he used to revive 
the Asuras killed by the Devas — to Katch the son of Brahaspati who was 
the priest of the Devas. The Mahabharat mentions an occasion when 
both Krishna and Arjuna were dead drunk. That shows that the best 
among the Aryan Society were not only not free from the drink habit 
but that they drank heavily. The most shameful part of it was that 
even the Aryan women were addicted to drink. For instance Sudeshna 2 
the wife of King Virat tells her maid Sairandhri to go to Kichaka’s 
palace and bring Sura as she was dying to have a drink. It is not to be 
supposed that only queens indulged in drinking. The habit of drinking 
was common among women of all classes and even Brahmin women were 
not free from it. That liquor and dancing was indulged in by the Aryan 
women is clear from the Kausitaki Grihya Sutra I. 11-12, which says; 
“Four or eight women who are not widowed, after having been regaled 
with wine and food are to dance for four times on the night previous to 
the wedding ceremony.” 

1 Mahabharat — Sabhaparva. 

2 Vanaparva. Adh. XV. 10: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


155 


THE ANCIENT REGIME : THE STATE OF THE ARYAN SOCIETY 155 

That the drinking of intoxicating liquor was indulged in by Brahmin 
women, not to speak of women of the lower Varnas, as late as the seventh 
and eighth centuries- A.D. in the Central region of Aryavarta, is clear 
from Kumarila Bhatta’s Tantra- Vartika I (iii). 4, which states, “Among 
the people of modern days we find the Brahmin women of the countries of 
Ahicchatra and Mathura to be addicted to drinking”. Kumarila condemned 
the practice in the case of Brahmins only, but not of Kshatriyas and 
Vaishyas men and women, if the liquor was distilled from fruits or flowers 
(Madhavi), and Molasses (Gaudi) and not from grains (Sura). 

The sexual immorality of the Aryan Society must shock their present 
day descendants. The Aryans of pre-Buddhist days had no such rule of 
prohibited degrees as we have today to govern their sexual or matrimonial 
relationship. 

According to the Aryan Mythology, Brahma is the creator. Brahma 
had three sons and a daughter. His one son Daksha married his sister. 
The daughters born of this marriage between brother and sister were 
married some to Kashyapa the son of Marichi the son of Brahma and 
some to Dharma the third son of Brahma. 1 

In the Rig-Veda there is an episode related of Yama and Yami brother 
and sister. According to this episode Yami the sister invites her brother 
Yama to cohabit with her and becomes angry when he refuses to do so. 2 

A father could marry his daughter. Vashishta married his own daughter 
Shatrupa when she came of age. 3 Manu married his daughter Ila . 4 Janhu 
married his daughter Janhavi . 5 Surya married his daughter Usha . 6 

There was polyandri not of the ordinary type. The polyandri prevalent 
among the Aryans was a polyandri when kinsmen cohabited with one 
woman. Dhahaprachetani and his son Soma cohabited with Marisha the 
daughter of Soma. 7 

Instances of grandfather marrying his grand-daughter are not wanting. 
Daksha gave his daughter in marriage to his father Brahma 8 and from that 
marriage was born the famous Narada. Dauhitra gave his 27 daughters 
to his father Soma for cohabitation and procreation. 9 

The Aryans did not mind co-habiting with women in the open and 
within sight of people. The Rishis used to perform certain religious 

1 Mahabharat Adiparva. Adh. 66. 

2 Rig. Veda. 

3 Hari Vansha Adh. II. 

4 Ibid. Adh. X. 

5 Ibid Adh. XXVII. 

6 Yask Nirutta Adh. V. Khanda VI. 

7 Harivansha Adh. II. 

8 Ibid. Adh. III. 

9 Ibid. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


156 


156 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

rites which were called Vamdevya vrata. These rites used to be performed 
on the Yadnya bhumi. If any woman came there and expressed a desire 
for sexual intercourse and asked the sage to satisfy her, the sage used 
to cohabit with her then and there in the open on the Yadnya bhumi. 
Instances of this may be mentioned. The case of the sage Parashara had 
sexual intercourse with Satyavati and also of Dirghatapa. That such a 
custom was common is shown by the existence of the word Ayoni. The 
word Ayoni is understood to mean of immaculate conception. That is 
not however the original meaning of the word. The original meaning 
of the word Yoni is house. Ayoni means conceived out of the house 
i.e. in the open. That there was nothing deemed to be wrong in this 
is clear from the fact that both Sita and Draupadi were Ayonija. That 
this was very common is clear from the fact that religious injunctions 
had to be issued against such a practice . 1 

There was prevalent among the Aryans the practice of renting out 
their women to others for a time. As an illustration may be mentioned 
the story of Madhavi . 2 The king Yayati gave his daughter Madhavi 
as an offering to his Guru Galav. Galav rented out the girl Madhavi 
to three kings, each a period. Thereafter he gave her in marriage to 
Vishwamitra. She remained with him until a son was born to her. 
Thereafter Galav took away the girl and gave her back to her father 
Yayati. 

Besides the practice of letting out women to others temporarily at a 
rent there was prevalent among the Aryans another practice namely 
allowing procreation by the best amongst them. Raising a family was 
treated by them as though it was a breeding or stock raising. Among 
the Aryas there was a class of persons called Devas who were Aryans 
but of a superior status and prowess. The Aryans allowed their women 
to have sexual intercourse with any one of the class of Devas in the 
interest of good breeding. This practice prevailed so extensively that 
the Devas came to regard prelibation in respect of the Aryan Women 
as their prescriptive right. No Aryan woman could be married unless 
this right of prelibation had been redeemed and the woman released 
from the control of the Devas by offering what was technically called 
Avadan. The Laja Hoame which is performed in every Hindu marriage 
and the details of which are given in the Ashwalayan Grahya Sutra is 
a relic of this act of the redemption of the Aryan woman from the right 
of prelibation of the Devas. The Avadan in the Laja Hoama is nothing 
but the price for the extinguishment of the right of the Devas over 


1 Mahabharat, Adi Parva — Adh. 193. 

2 Ibid. Udyoga Parva — Adh. 106-123. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\vol3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


157 


THE ANCIENT REGIME : THE STATE OF THE ARYAN SOCIETY 157 

the bride. The Saptapadi performed in all Hindu marriages and which 
is regarded as the most essential ceremony without which there is no 
lawful marriage has an integral connection with this right of prelibation 
of the Devas. Saptapadi means walking by the bridegroom seven steps 
with the bride. Why is this essential ? The answer is that the Devas, 
ii they were dissatisfied with the compensation, could claim the woman 
before the seventh step was taken. After the seventh step was taken, 
the right of the Devas was extinguished and the bridegroom could take 
away the bride and live as husband and wife without being obstructed 
or molested by the Devas. 

There was no rule of chastity for maidens. A girl could have sexual 
intercourse with and also progeny from anybody without contracting 
marriage. This is evident from the root meaning of the word Kanya which 
means a girl. Kanya comes from the root Karri which means a girl free 
to offer herself to any man. That they did offer themselves to any man 
and had children without contracting regular marriage is illustrated by 
the case of Kunti and Malsyagandha. Kunti had children from different 
men before she was married to Pandu and Matsyagandha had sexual 
intercourse with the sage Parashara before she married to Shantanu 
the father of Bhishma. 

Beastiality was also prevalent among the Aryans. The story of the 
sage Dam having sexual intercourse with a female dear, is well known. 
Another instance is that of Surya cohabiting with a mare. But the most 
hideous instance is that of the woman having sexual intercourse with 
the horse in the Ashvamedha Yadna. 


(INCOMPLETE) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\vo!3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


158 


CHAPTER 7 
A Sunken Priesthood 


This essay is numbered as Chapter III in the file of the Ancient 
Regime and contains 1 6 foolscap typed pages. This Chapter also 
seems to be left incomplete. — Editors. 

The priestly profession in the ancient Aryan Society was monopolized 
by the Brahmins. None except a Brahmin could become a priest. As 
custodians of religion, the Brahmins were the guides of the people in 
moral and spiritual matters. They were to set the standard for people 
to follow. Did the Brahmins act up to the standard? Unfortunately, all 
the evidence we have, shows that the Brahmins had fallen to the utmost 
depth of moral degradation. 

A Shrotriya Brahmin was supposed not to keep with him a store of 
provision lasting for more than a week. But they had systematically 
trampled upon this rule and were addicted to the use of the things 
stored up; stores, to wit, of foods, drinks, clothing, equipages, beddings, 
perfumes, and curry-stuffs. 

The Brahmins were addicted to visiting shows such as: — 

(1) Nautch dances (nakkam). 

(2) Singings of songs (gitam). 

(3) Instrumental music (vaditam). 

(4) Shows at fairs (pekham). 

(5) Ballads recitations (akkhanam). 

(6) Hand music (panisaram). 

(7) The chanting of bards (vetals). 

(8) Tam-tam playing (kumbhathunam). 

(9) Fair scenes (sobhanagarkam). 

(10) Acrobatic feats by Kandalas (Kandala-vamsa-dhopanam). 

(11) Combats of elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams, cocks 
and quails. 

(12) Bouts at quarterstaff, boxing, wrestling. 

(13-16) Sham-fights, roll-calls, manoeuvres, reviews. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


159 


A SUNKEN PRIESTHOOD 159 

They were addicted to games and recreations; that is to say, 

(1) Games on boards with eight, or with ten rows of squares. 

(2) The same games played by imagining such boards in the air. 

(3) Keeping going over diagrams drawn on the ground so that one 
steps only where one ought to go. 

(4) Either removing the pieces or men from a heap with one’s nail, 
or putting them into a heap, in each case without shaking it. He 
who shakes the heap, loses. 

(5) Throwing dice. 

(6) Hitting a short stick with a long one. 

(7) Dipping the hand with the fingers stretched out in lac, or red 
dye, or flour water, and striking the wet hand on the ground or 
on a wall, calling out ‘what shall it be?’ and showing the form 
required — elephants, horses & c. 

(8) Games with balls. 

(9) Blowing through toy pipes made of leaves. 

(10) Ploughing with toy ploughs. 

(11) Turning summersaults. 

(12) Playing with toy windmills made of palm leaves. 

(13) Playing with toy measures made of palm leaves. 

(14, 15) Playing with toy carts or toy bows. 

(16) Guessing at letters traced in the air, or on a playfellow’s back. 

(17) Guessing the playfellow’s thoughts. 

(18) Mimicry of deformities. 

They were addicted to the use of high and large couches; that is to say: 

(1) Moveable settees, high, and six feet long (Asandi). 

(2) Divans with animal figures carved on the supports (Pallanko). 

(3) Goat’s hair coverings with very long fleece (Gonako). 

(4) Patchwork counterpanes of many colours (Kittaka). 

(5) White blankets (Patika). 

(6) Woollen coverlets embroidered with flowers (Patalika). 

(7) Quilts stuffed with cotton wool (Tulika). 

(8) Coverlets embroidered with figures of lions, tigers, & c, (Vikatika). 

(9) Rugs with fur on both sides (Uddalom). 

(10) Rugs with fur on one side (Ekantalomi). 

(11) Coverlets embroidered with gems (Katthissam). 

(12) Silk coverlets (Koseyyam). 

(13) Carpets large enough for sixteen dancers (Kuttakam). 

(14-16) Elephant, horse and chariot rugs. 

(17) Rugs of antelope skins sewn together (Aginapaveni). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


160 


160 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(18) Rugs of skins of the plantain antelope. 

(19) Carpets with awnings above them (Sauttarakkhadam). 

(20) Sofas with red pillows for the head and feet”. 

The Brahmins were addicted to the use of means for adorning and 
beautifying themselves; that is to say: 

Rubbing in scented powders on one’s body, shampooing it, and bathing 
it, patting the limbs with clubs after the manner of wrestlers, the use of 
mirrors, eye-ointments, garlands, rouge, cosmetics, bracelets, necklaces, 
walking-sticks, reed cases for drugs, rapiers, sunshades, embroidered slippers, 
turbans, diadems, whisks of the yak tail and long-fringed white robes. 

The Brahmins were addicted to such low conversation as these: 

Tales of kings, of robbers, of ministers of state; tales of war, of terrors, 
of battles; talk about foods and drinks, clothes, beds, garlands, perfumes; 
talks about relationships, equipages, villages, towns, cities and countries; 
tales about women, and about heroes; gossip at street corners, or places 
whence water is fetched; ghost stories; desultory talk; speculations about 
the creation of the land or sea, or about existence and non-existence. 

The Brahmins were addicted to the use of wrangling phrases: such as: 
“You don’t understand this doctrine and discipline, I do.” 

“How should you know about this doctrine and discipline?” 

‘You have fallen into wrong views. It is I who am in the right.” 

“I am speaking to the point, you are not.” 

‘You are putting last what ought to come first, and first what ought to 

come last.” 

“What you’ve ex-cogitated so long, that is all quite upset.” 

‘You are proved to be wrong.” 

“Set to work to clear your views.” 

“Disentangle yourself if you can.” 

The Brahmins were addicted to taking messages, going on errands, and 
acting as go-betweens; to wit, on kings, ministers of state, Kshatriyas, 
Brahmans, or young men, saying: Go there, come hither, take this with 
you, bring that from thence.’ 

‘The Brahmins were tricksters, droner out (of holy words for pray), diviners, 

and exorcists, ever hungering to add gain to gain.’ 

The Brahmins earned their living by wrong means of livelihood, by low 
arts, such as these: 

(1) Palmistry — prophesying long life, prosperity, & c, (or the reverse 
from marks on a child’s hands, feet, & c.) 

(2) Divining by means of omens and signs. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


161 


A SUNKEN PRIESTHOOD 161 

(3) Auguries drawn from thunderbolts and other celestial portents. 

(4) Prognostication by interpreting dreams. 

(5) Fortune-telling from marks on the body. 

(6) Auguries from the marks on cloth gnawed by mice. 

(7) Sacrificing to Agni. 

(8) Offering oblations from a spoon. 

(9-13) Making offerings to gods of husks, of the red powder between 
the grain and the husk, of husked grain ready for boiling, or ghee 
and of oil. 

(14) Sacrificing by spewing mustard seeds, & c, into the fire out of 
one’s mouth. 

(15) Drawing blood from one’s right knee as a sacrifice to the gods. 

(16) Looking at the knuckles, & c, and, after muttering a charm, 
divining whether a man is well born of luck or not. 

(17) Determining whether the site for a proposed house or pleasance, 
is luck or not. 

(18) Advising on customary law. 

(19) Laying demons in a cemetery. 

(20) Laying ghosts. 

(21) Knowledge of the charms to be used when lodging in an earth 
house. 

(22) Snake charming. 

(23) The poison craft. 

(24) The scorpion craft”. 

(25) The mouse craft. 

(26) The bird craft. 

(27) The crow craft. 

(28) Foretelling the number of years that man has yet to live. 

(29) Giving charms to ward off arrows. 

(30) The animal wheel. 

The Brahmins earned their living by wrong means of livelihood, by 
low arts, such as these: 

Knowledge of the signs of good and bad qualities in the following 
things and of the marks in them denoting the health or luck of their 
owners: to wit, 

gems, staves, garments, swords, arrows, bows, other weapons, women, 
men, boys, girls, slaves, slave-girls, elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, 
oxen, goats, sheep, fowls, quails, iguanas, herrings, tortoises, and other 
animals. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


162 


162 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The Brahmins, earned their living by wrong means of livelihood by 
low arts such as soothsaying, to the effect that: 

The chiefs will march out. 

The home chiefs will attack and the enemies retreat. 

The enemies’ chiefs will attack, and ours will retreat. 

The home chiefs will gain the victory, and ours will suffer defeat. 
The foreign chiefs will gain the victory on this side, and ours will 
suffer defeat. 

Thus will there be victory on this side, defeat on that. 

The Brahmins, while living on food provided by the faithful, earn their 
living by wrong means of livelihood, by such low arts as foretelling: 

(1) There will be an eclipse of the Moon. 

(2) There will be an eclipse of the Sun. 

(3) There will be an eclipse of a star (Nakshatra). 

(4) There will be aberration of the Sun or the Moon. 

(5) The Sun or the Moon will return to its usual path. 

(6) There will be aberrations of the stars. 

(7) The stars will return to their usual course. 

(8) There will be a jungle fire. 

(9) There will be a fall of meteors. 

(10) There will be an earthquake. 

(11) The god will thunder. 

(12-15) There will be rising and setting, clearness and dimness of the 
Sun or the Moon or the stars, or foretelling of each of these fifteen 
phenomena that they will betoken such and such a result.” 

The Brahmins earned their living by wrong means of the livelihood, 
by low arts, such as these: 

Foretelling an abundant rainfall. 

Foretelling a deficient rainfall. 

Foretelling a good harvest. 

Foretelling scarcity of food. 

Foretelling tranquility. 

Foretelling disturbances. 

Foretelling a pestilence. 

Foretelling a healthy season. 

Counting on the fingers. 

Counting without using the fingers. 

Summing up large totals. 

Composing ballads, poetizing. 

Casuistry, sophistry. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


163 


A SUNKEN PRIESTHOOD 163 

The Brahmins, while living on food provided by the faithful, earn their 
living by wrong means of livelihood, by low arts, such as: 

(1) Arranging a lucky day for marriages in which the bride or 
bridegroom is brought home. 

(2) Arranging a lucky day for marriages in which the bride or 
bridegroom is sent forth. 

(3) Fixing a lucky time for the conclusion of treaties of peace (or 
using charms to procure harmony). 

(4) Fixing a lucky time for the outbreak of hostilities (or using charms 
to make discord). 

(5) Fixing a lucky time for the calling in of debts (or charms for 
success in throwing dice). 

(6) Fixing a lucky time for the expenditure of money (or charms to 
bring ill luck to an opponent throwing dice). 

(7) Using charms to make people lucky. 

(8) Using charms to make people unlucky. 

(9) Using charms to procure abortion. 

(10) Incantations to keep a man’s jaws fixed. 

(11) Incantations to bring on dumbness. 

(12) Incantations to make a man throw up his hands. 

(13) Incantations to bring on deafness. 

(14) Obtaining oracular answers by means of the magic mirror. 

(15) Obtaining oracular answers through a girl possessed. 

(16) Obtaining oracular answers from a god. 

(17) The worship of the Sun. 

(18) The worship of the Great One. 

(19) Bringing forth flames from one’s mouth. 

(20) Invoking Siri, the goddess of Luck. 

The Brahmins earned their living by wrong means of livelihood, by 
low arts, such as these: 

(1) Vowing gifts to a god if a certain benefit be granted. 

(2) Paying such vows. 

(3) Repeating charms while lodging in an earth house. 

(4) Causing virility. 

(5) Making a man impotent. 

(6) Fixing on lucky sites for dwellings. 

(7) Consecrating sites. 

(8) Ceremonial rinsings of the mouth. 

(9) Ceremonial bathings. 

(10) Offering sacrifices. 

(11-14) Administering emetics and purgatives. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


164 


164 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(15) Purging people to relieve the head (that is by giving drugs to 
make people sneeze). 

(16) Oiling people’s ears (either to make them grow or to heal sores 
on them). 

(17) Satisfying people’s eyes (soothing them by dropping medicinal 
oils into them). 

(18) Administering drugs through the nose. 

(19) Applying collyrium to the eyes. 

(20) Giving medicinal ointment for the eyes. 

(21) Practising as an oculist. 

(22) Practising as a surgeon. 

(23) Practising as a doctor for children. 

(24) Administering roots and drugs. 

(25) Administering medicines in rotation. 


(INCOMPLETE) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\vo!3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


165 


CHAPTER 8 

Reformers and Their Fate 

This is a typed bound copy consisting of 87 pages. The Ambatta 
Sutta starts at page 69 of the manuscript and after page 70, 
pages are numbered from A to Z. The beginning of page 71 
starts with Lohikka Sutta. — Editors. 

I. Aryan Society. II. Buddha and Reform. III. 

I 

It was Sir T. Madhava Raw who speaking of Hindu Society of his 
time said: 

“The longer one lives, observes, and thinks, the more deeply does he 
feel that there is no community on the face of the earth which suffers 
less from political evils and more from self-inflicted or self-accepted or 
self-created, and therefore avoidable evils, than the Hindu Community.” 

This view expresses quite accurately and without exaggeration the 
necessity of social reform in Hindu Society. 

The first Social Reformer and the greatest of them all is Gautama 
Buddha. Any history of Social Reform must begin with him and no 
history of Social Reform in India will be complete which omits to take 
account of his great achievements. 

Siddhartha, surname Gautama, was born in the Sakya clan at 
Kapilvastu in Northern India, on the borders of Nepal in 563 B.C. 
Tradition says he was a prince. He received education fit for a prince, 
was married and had a son. Oppressed by the evils and misery then 
prevalent in the Aryan Society he renounced the world at the age of 
twenty-nine and left his home in search for truth and deliverance. He 
became a mendicant and studied with two distinguished teachers, but 
finding that their teachings did not satisfy him he left them and became 
an ascetic. He gave up that also as being futile. By hard thinking he got 
insight into things and as a result of this insight he formulated his own 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


166 


166 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Dhamma. This was at the age of thirty-five. The remainder of his 
eighty years he spent in spreading his Dhamma and founding and 
administering an order of monks. He died about the year 483 B.C. 
at Kusinara surrounded by his devoted followers. 

To the carrying out of his mission, the Buddha devoted all his days 
after the achievement of enlightment. His time was divided between 
feeding the lamp of his own spiritual life by solitary meditation — 
just as Jesus spent hours in lonely prayer — and active preaching 
to large audiences of his monks, instructing the more advanced in 
the subtle points of inner development, directing the affairs of the 
Order, rebuking breaches of discipline, confirming the faithful in 
their virtue, receiving deputations, carrying on discussions with 
learned opponents, comforting the sorrowful, visiting kings and 
peasants, Brahmins and outcasts, rich and poor. He was a friend 
of publicans and sinners, and many a public harlot, finding herself 
understood and pitied, gave up her evil ways to take refuge in the 
“Blessed One” Such a life demanded a variety of moral qualities 
and social gifts, and among others a combination of democratic 
sentiments with an aristocratic Savoir Faire which is seldom met 
with. In reading the dialogues one can never forget that Gotama 
had the birth and upbringing of an aristocrat. He converses not 
only with Brahmins and pundits but with princes and ministers 
and kings on easy and equal terms. He is a good diner-out, with a 
fund of anecdotes and apparently a real sense of humour, and is a 
welcome quest at every house. A distinguished Brahmin is pictured 
as describing him thus: 

‘The venerable Gotama is well born on both sides, of pure 

descent is handsome, pleasant to look upon, inspiring trust, 

gifted with great beauty of complexion, fair in colour, fine in 
presence, stately to behold, virtuous with the virtue of the 
Arhats, gifted with goodness and virtue and with a pleasant 
voice and polite address, with no passion of lust left in him nor 
any fickleness of mind. He bids all men welcome, is congenial, 
conciliatory, not supercillious, accessible to all, not backward in 
conversation.’ 

But what appealed most to the India of his time, and has appealed 
most to India through the ages, is expressed by the Brahmin in these 
words: 


“The monk Gotama has gone forth into the religious life, giving 
up the great clan of his relatives, giving up much money and 
gold, treasure both buried and above ground. Truly while he 
was still a young man, without a gray hair on his head, in the 
beauty of his early manhood he went forth from the household 
life into the homeless state.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


167 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 167 

“Such a life as his, demanded not only pleasant manners, 
sympathy and kindness, but firmness and courage. When the 
occasion required it, he could be calmly severe with those who 
worked evil for the Order. Physical pain, he bore not only with 
equanimity but with no diminution of his inner joy. Courage also 
was needed and was found; as, for example, in the Buddha’s calm 
attitude during Devadatta’s various attempts to assassinate him, 
in facing threats of murder, and in the conversion of the famous 
bandit in the Kingdom of Kosala, whom all the countryside 
feared, and whom the Buddha visited, alone and unarmed, in his 
lair, changing him from a scourge of the kindom to a peaceful 
member of the Order. Neither pain, danger, nor insults marred 
his spiritual peace. When he was reviled he reviled not again. 

Nor was he lacking in tender thoughtfulness for those who needed 
his comfort and support.” 

He was beloved of all. Repeatedly he is described or describes himself, 
as one born into the world for the good of the many, for the happiness 
of the many, for the advantage, the good, the happiness of gods and 
men, out of compassion for the world. 

He left an indelible mark on the Aryan Society and although his 
name has gone out of India the impression of his teaching still remains. 
His religion spread like wild fire. It soon became the religion of the 
whole of India. But it did not remain confined to India. It reached 
every corner of the then known world. All races accepted it. Even the 
Afghans were once Buddhists. It did not remain confined to Asia. There 
is evidence to show that Buddhism was the religion of Celtic Britain.* 

What was the cause of this rapid spread of Buddhism ?On this point 
what Prof. Hopkins has said is worth quoting. This is what he says: 

“The cause, then, of the rapid spread of Buddhism at 
the beginning of its career lies only in the conditions of its 
teaching and the influential backing of its founder. It was the 
individual Buddha that captivated men; it was the teaching that 
emanated from him that fired enthusiasm; it was his position 
as an aristocrat that made him acceptable to the aristocracy, 
his magnetism that made him the idol of the people. From 
every page stands out the strong, attractive personality of this 
teacher and winner of hearts. No man ever lived so godless 
yet so godlike. Arrogating to himself no divinity, despairing 
of future bliss, but without fear as without hope, leader of 
thought but despising lovingly the folly of the world, exalted but 

* Dr. Donald A. Mackenzie. ‘Buddhism in Pre-Christian Britain. Blackie & Son. London. 
1 928 . — Editors 


z:\ambedkar\vol-3\vol3-03.indd MK SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 168 

168 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

adored, the universal brother, he wandered among men, simply, 
serenely; with gentle irony subduing them that opposed him, to 
congregation after congretation speaking with majestic sweetness, 
the master to each, the friend of all. His voice was singularly vibrant 
and eloquent; his very tones convinced the hearer, his looks inspired 
awe. From the tradition it appears that he must have been one 
of those whose personality alone suffices to make a man not only 
a leader but a god to the hearts of his fellows. When such a one 
speaks he obtains hearers. It matters little what he says, for he 
influences the motions, and bends whoever listens to his will. But 
if added to this personality, if encompassing it, there be the feeling 
in the minds of others that what this man teaches is not only a 
variety, but the very hope of their salvation; if for the first time 
they recognize in his words the truth that makes of slaves free men, 
of classes a brotherhood, then it is not difficult to see wherein lies 
the lightninglike speed with which the electric current passes from 
heart to heart. Such a man was Buddha, such was the essential 
of his teaching; and such was the inevitable rapidity of Buddhistic 
expansion and the profound influence of the shock that was produced 
by the new faith upon the moral consciousness of Buddha’s people.” 

To understand the great reform which he brought about by his 
teaching, it is necessary to have some idea of the degraded condition 
of the Aryan civilization at the time when Buddha started on the 
mission of his life. 

The Aryan Community of his time was steeped in the worst kind of 
debauchery: social, religious and spiritual. 

To mention only a few of the social evils, attention may be drawn 
to gambling. Gambling had become as widespread among the Aryans 
as drinking. 

Every king had a hall of gambling attached to his palace. Every 
king had an expert gambler in his employment as a companion to play 
with. King Viral had in his employment Kank as an expert gambler. 
Gambling was not merely a pastime with kings. They played with 
heavy stakes. They staked kingdoms, dependents, relatives, slaves, 
servants . 1 King Nala staked everything in gambling with Paskkar and 
lost everything. The only thing he did not stake was himself and his 
wife Damayanti. Nala had to go and live in the forest as a beggar. 
There were kings who went beyond Nala. The Mahabharat 2 tells how 
Dharma the eldest of the Pandavas gambled and staked everything. 


1 Mahabhar at — V anp ar va . 

2 /frid-Sabhaparva 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


169 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 169 

his brothers and also his and their wife Draupadi. Gambling was a matter 
of honour with the Aryans and any invitation to gamble was regraded 
as an injury to one’s honour and dignity. Dharma gambled with such 
disastrous consequences although he was warned beforehand. His excuse 
was that he was invited to gamble and that as a man of honour he could 
not decline such an invitation. 

This vice of gambling was not confined to kings. It had infected even 
the common folk. Rig-Veda contains lamentations of a poor Aryan ruined 
by gambling. The habit of gambling had become so common in Kautilya’s 
time that there were gambling houses licensed by the king from which 
the king derived considerable revenue. 

Drinking was another evil which was rampant among the Aryans. 
Liquors were of two sorts Soma and Sura. Soma was a sacrificial wine. The 
drinking of the Soma was in the beginning permitted only to Brahmins, 
Kshatriyas and Vaishyas. Subsequently it was permitted only to Brahmins 
and Kshatriyas. The Vaishyas were excluded from it and the Shudras 
were never permitted to taste it. Its manufacture was a secret known 
only to the Brahmins. Sura was open to all and was drunk by all. The 
Brahmins also drank Sura. Shukracharya 1 the priest to the Asuras drank 
so heavily that in his drunken state he gave the life-giving Mantras — 
known to him only and with which he used to revive the Asuras killed 
by the Devas — to Katch the son of Brahaspati who was the priest of the 
Devas. The Mahabharat mentions an occasion when both Krishna and 
Arjuna were dead drunk. That shows that the best among the Aryan 
Society were not only not free from the drink habit but that they drank 
heavily. The most shameful part of it was that even the Aryan women 
were addicted to drink. For instance Sudeshna 2 the wife of king Virat 
tells her maid Sairandhri to go to Kichaka’s palace and bring Sura as 
she was dying to have a drink. It is not to be supposed that only queens 
indulged in drinking. The habit of drinking was common among women 
of all classes and even Brahmin women were not free from it. 3 That 
liquor and dancing was indulged in by the Aryan women is clear from 
the Kausitaki Grihya Sutra I. 11-12, which says, “Four or eight women 
who are not widowed after having been regaled with wine and food are 
to dance for four times on the night previous to the wedding ceremony.” 

1 Mahabharat. 

2 Ibid. Viratparva Ad. XV. 10. 

3 That the drinking of intoxicating liquor was indulged in by Brahmin women, not to speak of 
women of the lower Varnas, as late as the seventh and eighth centuries A.D. in the Central 
region of Aryavarta, is clear from Kumarita Bhatta’s Tantra-Vartika I (iii). 4, which states. 
“Among the people of modern days we find the Brahmin women of the countries of Ahicchatra 
and Mathura to be addicted to drinking.” Kumarila condemned the practice in the case of 
Brahmins only, but not of Kshatriyas and Vaishyas men and women if the liquor was distilled 
from fruits or flowers (Madhavi), and Molasses (Gaudi) and not from grains (Sura). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


170 


170 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Turning to the Aryan Society it was marked by class war and class 
degradation. The Aryan Society recognized four classes, the Brahmins, 
Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras. These divisions were not merely 
horizontal divisions, all on a par with each other in the matter of social 
relationship. These divisions, had become vertical, one above the other. 
Being placed above or below there was both jealousy and rivalry among 
the four classes. This jealousy and rivalry had given rise even to enmity. 
This enmity was particularly noticeable between the two highest classes, 
namely, the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas and there was a regular class 
war between the two, so intense that it would delight the heart of any 
Marxian to read the descriptions thereof. Unfortunately there is no detailed 
history of this class war between the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas. Only 
a few instances have been recorded. Vena, Pururavas, Nahusha, Sudas, 
Sumukh and Nimi were some of the Kshatriya kings who came into the 
conflict with the Brahmins. The issues in these conflicts were different. 

The issue between Vena and the Brahmins was whether a King could 
command and require the Brahmins to worship him and offer sacrifice 
to him instead of the Gods. The issue between Pururavas and the 
Brahmins was whether a Kshatriya King could confiscate the property 
of the Brahmin. The issue between Nahusha and the Brahmins was 
whether a Kshatriya king could order a Brahmin to do a servile job. The 
issue between Nimi and the Brahmins was whether the king was bound 
to employ only his family priest at the sacrificial ceremony. The issue 
between Sudas and the Brahmins was whether the king was bound to 
employ only a Brahmin as a priest. 

This shows how big were the issues between the two classes. No wonder 
that the struggle between them was also the bitterest. The wars between 
them were not merely occasional riots. They were wars of extermination. 
It is stated that Parashuram a Brahmin fought against the Kshatriyas 
twenty-one times and killed every Kshatriya. 

While the two classes were fighting among themselves for supremacy, 
they both combined to keep down the Vaishyas and the Shudras. The 
Vaishya was a milch cow. He lived only to pay taxes. The Shudra was a 
general beast of burden. These two classes existed for the sole purpose 
of making the life of the Brahmins and Kshatriyas glorious and happy. 
They had no right to live for themselves. They lived to make the life of 
their betters possible. 

Below these two classes there were others. They were the Chandalas 
and Shwappakas. They were not untouchables but they were degraded. 
They were outside the pale of society and outside the pale of law. They 
had no rights and no opportunities. They were the rejects of the Aryan 
Society. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


171 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 171 

The sexual immorality of the Aryan Society must shock their present 
day descendants. The Aryans of pre-Buddhist days had no such rule of 
prohibited degrees as we have today to govern their sexual or matrimonial 
relationship. 

According to the Aryan Mythology, Brahma is the creator. Brahma 
had three sons and a daughter. His one son Daksha married his sister. 
The daughters born of this marriage between brother and sister were 
married some to Kashyapa the son of Marichi the son of Brahma and 
some to Dharma the third son of Brahma. 1 

In the Rig-Veda there is an episode related of Yama and Yami brother 
and sister. According to this episode Yami the sister invites her brother 
Yama to cohabit with her and becomes angry when he refuses to do so. 2 

A father could marry his daughter. Vashishta married his own daughter 
Shatrupa when she came of age. 3 Manu married his daughter Ila 4 Janhu 
married his daughter Janhavi. 5 Surya married his daughter Usha. 6 
There was polyandri not of the ordinary type. The polyandri prevalent 
among the Aryans was a polyandri when Kinsmen cohabited with one 
woman. Dhahaprachetani and his son Soma cohabited with Marisha the 
daughter of Soma. 7 

Instances of grandfather marrying his grand- daughter are not wanting. 
Daksha gave his daughter in marriage to his father Brahma 8 and from 
that marriage was born the famous Narada. Dauhitra gave his 27 
daughters to his father Soma for cohabitation and procreation. 9 

The Aryans did not mind cohabiting with women in the open and 
within sight of people. The Rishis used to perform certain religious 
rites which were called Vamdevya vrata. These rites used to be 
performed on the Yadnya Bhumi. If any woman came there and 
expressed a desire for sexual intercourse and asked the sage to satisfy 
her, the sage used to cohabit with her then and there in the open on 
the Yadnya Bhumi. Instances of this may be mentioned; the case of 
the sage Parashara who had sexual intercourse with Satyavati and 
also of Dirghatapa. That such a custom was common is shown by the 
existence of the word Ayoni. The word Ayoni is understood to mean 
of immaculate conception. That is not however the original meaning 
of the word. The original meaning of the word Yoni is house. Ayoni 

1 Mahabharata Adiparva. Adh. 66. 

2 Rig Veda. 

3 Harivansha Adh. II.. 

4 Ibid Adh. X. 

5 Ibid Adh. XXVII. 

6 Yask Nirukta Adh. V. Khanda VI. 

7 Harivansha Adh. II. 

8 Harivansha Adh. III. 

9 Ibid, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


172 


172 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

means conceived out of the house i.e. in the open. That there was nothing 
deemed to be wrong in this is clear from the fact that both Sita and 
Draupadi were Ayonija. That this was very common is clear from the 
fact that religious injunctions had to be issued against such a practice . 1 

There was prevalent among the Aryans the practice of renting out 
their women to others for a time. As art illustration may be mentioned 
the story of Madhavi 2 The king Yayati gave his daughter Madhavi as an 
offering to his guru Galav. Galav rented out the girl Madhavi to three 
kings each a period. Thereafter he gave her in marriage to Vishwamitra. 
She remained with him until a son was born to her. Thereafter Galav 
took away the girl and gave her back to her father Yayati. 

Besides the practice of letting out women to others temporarily at a 
rent, there was prevalent among the Aryans another practice namely, 
allowing procreation by the best amongst them. Raising a family was 
treated by them as though it was a breeding or stock raising. Among 
the Aryas there was a class of persons called Devas who were Aryans 
but of a superior status and prowess. The Aryans allowed their women 
to have sexual intercourse with any one of the class of Devas in the 
inerest of good breeding. This practice prevailed so extensively that 
the Devas came to regard prelibation in respect of the Aryan women 
as their prescriptive right. No Aryan woman could be married unless 
this right of prelibation had been redeemed and the woman released 
from the control of the Devas by offering what was technically called 
Avadan. The Laja Hoame which is performed in every Hindu marriage 
and the details of which are given in the Ashwalayan Grahya Sutra 
is a relic of this act of the redemption of the Aryan woman from the 
right of prelibation of the Devas. The Avadan in the Laja Hoame is 
nothing but the price for the extinguishment of the right of the Devas 
over the bride. The Saptapadi performed in all Hindu marriages and 
which is regarded as the most essential ceremony without which there 
is no lawful marriage has an integral connection with this right of 
prelibation of the Devas. Saptapadi means walking by the bridegroom 
seven steps with the bride. Why is this essential ? The answer is that 
the Devas if they were dissatisfied with the compensation could claim 
the woman before the seventh step was taken. After the seventh step 
was taken, the right of the Devas was extinguished and the bridegroom 
could take away the bride and live as husband and wife without being 
obstructed or molested by the Devas. 

1 Mahabharat Adi Parva — Add. 193. 

2 Mahabharat Udyoga parva. Adh. 106-123. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


173 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 173 

There was no rule of chastity for maidens. A girl could have sexual 
intercourse with and also progeny from anybody without contracting 
marriage. This is evident from the root meaning of the word Kanya which 
means a girl. Kanya comes from the root Kam which means a girl free 
to offer herself to any man. That they did offer themselves to any man 
and had children without contracting regular marriage is illustrated by 
the case of Kunti and Matsyagandha. Kunti had children from different 
men before she was married to Pandu and Matsyagandha had sexual 
intercourse with the sage Parashara before she was married to Shantanu 
the father of Bhishma. 

Beastiality was also prevalent among the Aryans. The story of the 
sage Dam having sexual intercourse with a female deer 1 is well known. 
Another instance is that of Surya cohabiting with a mare 2 . But the most 
hideous instance is that of the woman having sexual intercourse with 
the horse in the Ashvamedha Yadna. 

The religion of the Aryan consisted of the Yadna or sacrifice. The 
sacrifice was a means to enter into the godhead of the gods, and even 
to control the gods. The traditional sacrifices were twenty one in number 
divided into three classes of seven each. The first were sacrifices of 
butter, milk, corn, etc. The second class covered Soma sacrifices and 
third animal sacrifices. The sacrifice may be of short duration or long 
duration lasting for a year or more. The latter was called a Sattra. The 
argument in favour of the sacrifice is that eternal holiness is won by 
him that offers the sacrifice. Not only a man’s self but also his Manes 
stood to benefit by means of sacrifice. He gives the Manes pleasure with 
his offering, but he also raises their estate, and sends them up to live 
in a higher world . 3 

The sacrifice was by no means meant as an aid to the acquirement of 
heavenly bliss alone. Many of the great sacrifices were for the gaining 
of good things on earth. That one should sacrifice without the ulterior 
motive of gain is unknown. Brahmanic India knew no thank offering. 
Ordinarily the gain is represented as a compensating gift from the 
divinity, whom they sacrifice. The sacrifice began with the recitation: “He 
offers the sacrifice to the god with this text: ‘Do thou give to me (and) I 
(will) give to thee; do thou bestow on me (and) I (will) bestow on thee’.” 

The ceremony of the sacrifice was awe-inspiring. Every word was 
pregnant with consequences and even the pronunciation of the word 
or accent was fateful. There are indications, however, that the priest 
themselves understood that, much in the ceremonial was pure hocus- 
pocus, and not of much importance as it was made out to be. 

1 Mahabharat Adhyaya 1-118. 

2 Ibid. Adhyaya 66. 

3 This is taken from Hopkins — The Religions of India. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


174 


174 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Every sacrifice meant fee to the priest. As to fee, the rules were 
precise and their propounders were unblushing. The priest performed 
the sacrifice for the fee alone, and it must consist of valuable garments, 
kine, horses or gold — when each was to be given was carefully stated. 
The priests had built up a great complex of forms, where at every turn 
fees were demanded. The whole expense, falling on one individual for 
whose benefit the sacrifice was performed, must have been enormous. 
How costly the whole thing became can be seen from the fact that in 
one place the fee for the sacrifice is mentioned as one thousand cows. 
For this greed, which went so far that he proclaimed that he who gives 
a thousand cows obtains all things of heaven. The priest had a good 
precedent to cite, for, the gods of heaven, in all tales told of them, ever 
demand a reward from each other when they help their neighbour gods. 
If the Gods seek rewards, the priest has a right to do the same. 

The principal sacrifice was the animal sacrifice. It was both costly and 
barbaric. In the Aryan religion there are five sacrificial animals mentioned. 
In this list of sacrificial animals man came first. The sacrifice of a man 
was the costliest. The rules of sacrifice required that the individual to be 
slaughtered must be neither a priest nor a slave. He must be a Kshatriya 
or Vaishya. According to the ordinary valuation of those times the cost 
of buying a man to be sacrificed was one thousand cows. Besides being 
costly and barbaric, it must have been revolting because the sacrificers 
had not only to kill the man but to eat him. Next to man came the 
horse. That also was a costly sacrifice because the horse was a rare and 
a necessary animal for the Aryans in their conquest of India. The Aryans 
could hardly afford such a potent instrument of military domination 
to be offered as sacrifice. The sacrifice must have been revolting in as 
much as one of the rituals in the horse -sacrifice was the copulation of 
the horse before it was slaughtered with the wife of the sacrificer. 

The animals most commonly offered for sacrifice were of course the 
cattle which were used by the people for their agricultural purposes. 
They were mostly cows and bullocks. 

The Yadnas were costly and they would have died out of sheer 
considerations of expense involved. But they did not. The reason is 
that the stoppage of Yadna involved the question of the loss of the 
Brahmin’s fees. There could be no fees if the Yadna ceased to be 
performed and the Brahmin would starve. The Brahmin therefore 
found a substitute for the costly sacrificial animals. For a human 
sacrifice the Brahmin allowed as a substitute for a live man, a man 
of straw or metal or earth. But they did not altogether give up human 
sacrifice for fear that this Yadna might be stopped and they should 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


175 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 175 

lose their fees. When human sacrifice became rare, animal sacrifice came 
in as a substitute. Animal sacrifice was also a question of expense to the 
laity. Here again rather than allow the sacrifice to go out of vogue, the 
Brahmins came forward with smaller animals for cattle just as cattle 
had been allowed to take the place of the man and the horse. All this 
was for the purpose of maintaining the Yadna so that the Brahmin did 
not lose his fees which was his maintenance. So set were the Brahmins 
on the continuance of the Yadna that they were satisfied with merely 
rice as an offering. 

It must not however be supposed that the institution of substitutes of 
the Yadnas of the Aryans had become less horrid. The introduction of 
substitutes did not work as a complete replacement of the more expensive 
and more ghastly sacrifice by the less expensive and the more innocent. 
All that it meant was that the offering may be according to the capacity 
of the sacrificer. If he was poor his offering may be rice. If he was well 
to do it might be a goat. If he was rich it might be a man, horse, cow 
or a bull. The effect of the subsitutes was that the Yadna was brought 
within the capacity of all so that the Brahmin reaped a larger harvest of 
feast on the total. It did not have the effect of stopping animal sacrifice. 
Indeed animals continued to be sacrificed by the thousands. 

The Yadna often became a regular carnage of cattle at which the 
Brahmins did the work of butchers. One gets some idea of the extent of 
this carnage of innocent animals from references to the Yadnas which 
one comes across in Buddhist literature. In the Suttanipat a description 
is given of the Yadna that was arranged to be performed by Pasenadi, 
king of Kosala. It is stated that there were tied to the poles for slaughter 
at the Yadna five hundred oxen, five hundred bulls, five hundred cows, 
five hundred goats and five hundred lambs and that the servents of the 
king who were detailed to do the jobs according to the orders given to 
them by the officiating Brahmin priests were doing their duties with 
tears in their eyes. 

The Yadna besides involving a terrible carnage was really a kind of 
carnival. Besides roast meet there was drink. The Brahmins had Soma 
as well as Sura. The others had Sura in abundance. Almost every Yadna 
was followed by gambling and what is most extraordinary is that, side 
by side there went on also sexual intercourse in the open. Yadna had 
become debauchery and there was no religion left in it. 

The Aryan religion was just a series of observances. Behind these 
observances there was no yearning for a good and a virtuous life. 
There was no hunger or thirst for rightousness. Their religion was 
without any spiritual content. The hymns of the Rig Veda furnish very 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


176 


176 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

good evidence of the absence of any spiritual basis for the Aryan religion. 
The hymns are prayers addressed by the Aryans to their gods. What 
do they ask for in these prayers ? Do they ask to be kept away from 
temptation ? Do they ask for deliverance from evil ? Do they ask for 
forgiveness of sins? Most of the hymns are in praise of Indra. They 
praise him for having brought destruction to the enemies of the Aryans. 
They praise him because he killed all the pregnant wives of Krishna, 
an Asura. They praise him because he destroyed hundreds of villages 
of the Asuras. They praise him because he killed lakhs of Dasyus. The 
Aryans pray to Indra to carry on greater destruction among the Anaryas 
in the hope that they may secure to themselves the food supplies of the 
Anaryas and the wealth of the Anaryas. Far from being spiritual and 
elevating, the hymns of the Rig-Veda are saturated with wicked thoughts 
and wicked purposes. The Aryan religion never concerned itself with 
what is called a righteous life. 

II 

Such was the state of the Aryan Society when Buddha was born. 
There are two pertinent questions regarding Buddha as a reformer who 
laboured to reform the Aryan Society. What were the chief planks in 
his reform ? To what extent did he succeed in his reform movement ? 

To take up the first question. 

Buddha felt that for the inculcation of a good and a pure life, example 
was better than precept. The most important thing he did was to lead 
a good and a pure life so that it might serve as a model to all. How 
unblemished a life he led can be gathered from the Brahma-Jala Sutta. 
It is reproduced below because it not only gives an idea of the pure 
life that Buddha led but it also gives an idea of how impure a life the 
Brahmins, the best among the Aryans led. 

Brahma Jala Sutta 

1. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One was once going along the 
high road between Rajagaha and Nalanda with a great company of the 
brethren with about five hundred brethren. And Suppiya the mendicant 
too was going along the high road between Rajagaha and Nalanda with 
his disciple the young Brahmadatta. Now just then Suppiya the mendicant 
was speaking in many ways in dispraise of the Buddha, in dispraise of 
the Doctrine, in dispraise of the Order. But young Brahmadatta, his 
pupil, gave utterance, in many ways, to praise of the Buddha, to praise 
of the Doctrine, to praise of the Order. Thus they two, teacher and pupil, 
holding opinions in direct contradiction of one to the other, were following, 
step by step, after the Bleased one and the company of the brethren. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


177 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 177 

2. Now the Blessed one put up at the royal rest-house in the 
Ambalatthika pleasance to pass the night, and with him the company 
of the brethren. And so also did Suppiya the mendicant, and with him 
his young disciple Brahmadatta. And there, at the rest-houses, these 
two carried on the same discussion as before. 

3. And in the early dawn a number of the brethren assembled as they 
rose up, in the pavilion; and this was the trend of the talk that sprang 
up among them, as they were seated there. ‘How wonderful a thing is 
it, brethren, and how strange that the Blessed One, he who knows and 
sees, the Arahat, the Buddha Supreme, should so clearly have perceived 
how various are the inclination of men! For see how while Suppiya the 
mendicant speaks in many ways in dispraise of the Buddha, the Doctrine, 
and the Order, his own disciple, young Brahmadatta, speaks, in as many 
ways, in praise of them. So do these two, teacher and pupil, follow step 
by step after the Blessed One and the company of the brethren, giving 
utterance to views in direct contradiction of one to the other. 

4. Now the Blessed One, on realising what was the drift of their talk, 
went to the pavilion, and took his seat on the mat spread out for him. 
And when he had sat down he said: “What is the talk on which you 
are engaged sitting here, and what is the subject of the conversation 
between you ?” And they told him all. And he said: 

5. Brethren, if outsiders should speak against me, or against the 
Doctrine, or against the Order, you should not on that account either bear 
malice, or suffer heart-burning, or feel ill-will. If you, on that account, 
should be angry and hurt, that would stand in the way of your own 
self-conquest. If, when others speak against us, you feel angry at that, 
and displeased, would you then be able to judge how far that speach of 
theirs is well said or ill? 

‘That would not be so, Sir.’ 

‘But when outsiders speak in dispraise of me, or of the Doctrine, or. of 
the Order, you should unravel what is false and point it out as wrong, 
saying: “For this or that reason this is not the fact, that is not so, such 
a thing is not found among us, is not in us.” 

6. But also, brethren, if outsiders should speak in praise of me, in 
praise of the Doctrine, in praise of the Order, you should not, on that 
account, be filled with pleasure or gladness, or be lifted up in heart. 
Were you to be so that also would stand in the way of your self-conquest. 
When outsiders speak in praise of me, or of the Doctrine, or of the Order, 
you should acknowledge what is right to be the fact, saying: “For this 
or that reason this is the fact, that is so, such a thing is found among 
us, is in us.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


178 


178 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

7. It is in respect only of trifling things, of matters of little value, of 
mere morality, that an unconverted man. when praising the Tathagata, 
would speak. And what are such trifling, minor details of mere morality 
that he would praise? 

(4) (The Moralities. Part I). 

8. “Putting away the killings of living things, Gotama the recluse 
holds aloof from the destruction of life. He has laid the cudgel and the 
sword aside, and ashamed of roughness, and full of mercy, he dwells 
compassionate and kind to all creatures that have life.” It is thus that 
the unconverted man, when speaking in praise of the Tathagata, might 
speak. 

Or he might say: “Putting away the taking of what has not been given, 
Gotama the recluse lived aloof from grasping what is not his own. He 
takes only what is given, and expecting that gifts will come, he passes 
his life in honesty and purity of heart.” 

Or he might say: “Putting away unchastity, Gotama the recluse is 
chaste. He holds himself aloof, far off, from the vulgar practice, from 
the sexual act.” 

9. Or he might say: “Putting away lying words, Gotama the recluse 
holds himself aloof from falsehood. He speaks truth from the truth he 
never swerves; faithful and trustworthy, he breaks not his word to the 
world”. 

Or he might say: “Putting away slander, Gotama the recluse holds 
himself aloof from calumny. What he hears here he repeats not elsewhere 
to raise a quarrel against the people here; what he hears elsewhere he 
repeats not here to raise a quarrel against the people there. Thus does 
he live as a binder together of those who are divided, an encourager of 
those who are friends, a peacemaker, a lover of peace, impassioned for 
peace, a speaker of words that make for peace.” 

Or he might say: “Putting away rudeness of speech, Gotama the recluse 
holds himself aloof from harsh language. Whatsoever word is blameless, 
pleasant to the ear, lovely, reaching to the heart, urbane, pleasing to 
the people, beloved of the people — such are words he speaks.” 

Or he might say: “Putting away frivolous talk, Gotama the recluse holds 
himself aloof from vain conversation. In season he speaks, in accordance 
with the facts, words full of meaning, on religion, on the discipline of 
the Order. He speaks, and at the right time, words worthy to be laid up 
in one’s heart, fitly illustrated, clearly divided, to the point.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


179 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 179 

10. Or he might say: “Gotama the recluse holds himself aloof from causing 
injury to seeds or plants. 

He takes but one meal a day, not eating at night, refraining from food after 
hours (after midday). 

He refrains from being a spectator at shows at fairs with nautch dances, 
singing, and music. 

He abstains from wearing, adorning, or ornamenting himself with garlands, 
scents, and unguents. 

He abstains from the use of the large and lofty beds. 

He abstains from accepting silver or gold. 

He abstains from accepting uncooked grain. 

He abstains from accepting raw meat. 

He abstains from accepting women or girls. 

He abstains from accepting bondmen or bond-women. 

He abstains from accepting sheep or goats. 

He abstains from accepting fowls or swine. 

He abstains from accepting elephants, cattle, horses and mare. 

He abstains from accepting cultivated fields or waste. 

He abstains from the acting as a go-between or messenger. 

He abstains from buying and selling. 

He abstains from cheating with scales or bronzes or measures. 

He abstains from the crooked ways of bribery, cheating, and fraud. 

He abstains from maiming, murder, putting in bonds, highway robbery, 
dacoity, and violence.” 

Such are the things, brethren, which an unconverted man, when speaking 
in praise of the Tathagata might say. 


Here ends the Kula Sila (the Short Paragraphs on Conduct). 


11. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans, while living on 
food provided by the faithful, continue addicted to the injury of seedlings and 
growing plants whether propagated from roots or cuttings or joints or buddings 
or seeds — Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such injury to seedlings and 
growing plants.” 

12. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans, while living on 
food provided by the faithful, continue addicted to the use of the things stored 
up; stores, to wit, of foods, drinks, clothing, equipages, bedding, perfumes, and 
curry-stuffs — Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such use of things stored up.” 

13. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans, while living on 
food provided by the faithful, continue addicted to visiting shows; that is to say, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


180 


180 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(1) Nautch dances (nakkam), 

(2) Singings of songs (gitam) 

(3) Instrumental music (vaditam) 

(4) Shows at fairs (pekham) 

(5) Ballads recitations (akkhanam) 

(6) Hand music (paniseram) 

(7) The chanting of bards (vetala) 

(8) Tam-tam playing (kumbhathunam) 

(9) Fair scences (sobhanagarkam) 

(10) Acrobatic feats by Kandalas (Kandala-vamsa-dhopanam) 

(11) Combats of elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, goats, rams, cocks and 
quails. 

(12) Bouts at quarterstaff, boxing, wrestling. 

(13) -(16) Sham-fights, roll-calls, manoeuvres, reviews. 

Gotama the recluse holds aloof from visiting such shows.” 

14. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans, while living 
on food provided by the faithful, continue addicted to games and recreations; 
that is to say, 

(1) Games on boards with eight, or with ten, rows of squares. 

(2) The same games played by imagining such boards in the air. 

(3) Keeping going over diagrams drawn’ on the ground so that one steps 
only where one ought to go. 

(4) Either removing the pieces or men from a heap with one’s nail, or 
putting them into a heap, in each case without shaking it. He who shakes 
the heap, loses. 

(5) Throwing dice. 

(6) Hitting a short stick with a long one. 

(7) Dipping the hand with the fingers stretched out in lac, or red dye, or 
flour water, and striking the wet hand on the ground or on a wall, calling 
out ‘What shall it be?’ and showing the form requires — elephants, horses etc., 

(8) Games with balls. 

(9) Blowing through toy pipes made of leaves. 

(10) Ploughing with toy ploughs. 

(11) Turning summersaults. 

(12) Playing with toy windmills made of palm leaves. 

(13) Playing with toy measures made of palm leaves. 

(14, 15) Playing with toy carts or toy bows. 

(16) Guessing at letters traced in the air, or on a playfellow’s back. 

(17) Guessing the playfellow’s thoughts. 

(18) Mimicry of deformities. 

Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such games and recreations.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


181 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 181 

15. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans, while living 
on food provided by the faithful, continue addicted to the use of high and 
large couches; that is to say, 

(1) Moveable settees, high, and six feet long (Asandi). 

(2) Divans with animal figures carved on the supports (Pallanko). 

(3) Goats’ hair coverings with very long fleece (Ganako). 

(4) Patchwork counterpanes of many colours (Kittaka). 

(5) White blankets (Patika). 

(6) Woollen coverlets embroidered with flowers (Patalika). 

(7) Quilts stuffed with cotton wood (Tulika). 

(8) Coverlets embroidered with figures of lions, tigers, &c, (Vikatika). 

(9) Rugs with fur on both sides (Uddalomi). 

(10) Rugs with fur on one side (Ekantalomi). 

(11) Coverlets embroidered with gems (Katthissam). 

(12) Silk coverlets (Koseyyam). 

(13) Carpets large enough for sixteen dancers (Kuttakam). 

(14-16) Elephant, horse, and chariot rugs. 

(17) Rugs of antelope skins sewn together (Aginapaveni). 

(18) Rugs of skins of the plantain antelope. 

(19) Carpets with awnings above them (Sauttarakkhadam). 

(20) Sofas with red pillows for the head and feet. “ 

16. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans, while living 
on food provided by the faithful, continue addicted to the use of means for 
adorning and beautifying themselves: that is to say: 

Rubbing in scented powders on one’s body, shampooing it, and bathing 
it. Patting the limbs with clubs after the manner of wrestlers. The use of 
mirrors, eye-ointments, garlands, rouge, cosmetics, bracelets, necklaces, 
walking-sticks, reed cases for drugs, rapiers, sunshades, embroidered slippers, 
turbans, diadems, whisks of the yak’s tail, and long-fringed white robes. 

Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such means of adorning and beautifying 
the person.” 

17. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans while living 
on food provided by the faithful, continue addicted to such low conversation 
as these: 

Tales of kings, of robbers, of ministers of state: tales of war, of 
terrors, of battles; talk about foods and drinks, clothes, beds, garlands, 
perfumes; talks about relationships, equipages, villages, towns, cities, 
and countries; tales about women, and about heroes; gossip at street 
corners, or places whence water is fetched; ghost stories; desultory 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


182 


182 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

talk; speculations about the creation of the land or sea, or about 
existence and non-existence. Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such 
low conversation. 

18. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans, while 
living on food provided by the faithful, continue addicted to the use of 
wrangling phrases: such as: 

“You don’t understand this doctrine and discipline, I do.” 

“How should you know about this doctrine and discipline?” 

“You have fallen into wrong views. It is I who am in the right.” 

“I am speaking to the point, you are not.” 

“You are putting last what ought to come first, and first what ought 
to come last.” 

“What you’ve excogitated so long, that’s all quite upset.” 

“Your challenge has been taken up.” 

“You are proved to be wrong.” 

“Set to work to clear your views.” 

“Disentangle yourself if you can.” Gotama the recluse holds aloof from 
such wrangling phrases.” 

19. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans, while 
living on food provided by the faithful, continue addicted to taking 
messages, going on errands, and acting as go-betweens; to wit, on kings, 
ministers of state, Kshatriyas, Brahmans, or young men, saying: ‘Go 
there, come hither, take this with you, bring that from thence.’ 

Gotama the recluse abstains from such servile duties.” 

20. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans, while 
living on food provided by the faithful, are tricksters, droners out (of 
holy words for pay), diviners, and exorcists, ever hungering to add gain 
to gain. 

Gotam the recluse holds aloof from such deception and patter.” 

Here ends the Majjhima Sila (the Longer Paragraphs on Conduct). 


21. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans, while 
living on food provided by the faithful, earn their living by wrong means 
of livelihood, by low arts, such as these: 

(1) Palmistry — prophesying long life, prosperity, &c, (or the reverse), 
from marks on a child’s hands, feet, &c. 

(2) Divining by means of omens and signs. 

(3) Auguries drawn from thunderbolts and other celestial portents. 

(4) Prognostication by interpreting dreams. 

(5) Fortune-telling from marks on the body. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


183 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 183 

(6) Auguries from the marks on cloth gnawed by mice. 

(7) Sacrificing to Agni. 

(8) Offering oblations from a spoon. 

(9-13) Making offerings to gods of husks, of the red powder between the 
grain and the husk, of husked grain ready for boiling, of ghee and 
of oil. 

(14) Sacrificing by spewing mustard seeds, &c., into the fire out of one’s 
mouth. 

(15) Drawing blood from one’s right knee as a sacrifice to the gods. 

(16) Looking at the knuckles, &c., and, after muttering a charm, divining 
whether a man is well born of luck or not. 

(17) Determining whether the site, for a proposed house or pleasance, 
is lucky or not. 

(18) Advising on customary law. 

(19) Laying demons in a cemetery. 

(20) Laying ghosts. 

(21) Knowledge of the charms to be used when lodging in an earth 
house. 

(22) Snake charming. 

(23) The poison craft. 

(24) The scorpion craft. 

(25) The mouse craft. 

(26) The bird craft. 

(27) The crow craft. 

(28) Foretelling the number of years that a man has yet to live. 

(29) Giving charms to ward off arrows. 

(30) The animal wheel. 

Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such low arts.” 

22. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans while 
living on food provided by the faithful, earn their living by wrong means 
of livelihood, by low arts, such as these: 

Knowledge of the signs of good and bad qualities in the following things, 
and of the marks in them denoting the health or luck of their owners: to 
wit, gems, staves, garments, swords, arrows, bows, other weapons, women, 
men, boys, girls, slaves, slave-girls, elephants, horses, buffaloes, bulls, oxen, 
goats, sheep, fowls, quails, iguanas, herrings, tortoises, and other animals. 

Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such low arts.” 

23. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans, 
while living on food provided by the faithful, earn their living by 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


184 


184 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

wrong means of livelihood by low arts, such as soothsaying to the effect that: 

The chiefs will march out. 

The home chiefs will attack, and the enemies retreat. 

The enemies’ chiefs will attack, and ours will retreat. 

The home chiefs will gain the victory, and ours will suffer defeat. 

The foreign chiefs will gain the victory on this side, and ours will suffer 
defeat. 

Thus will there be victory on this side, defeat on that. Gotama the recluse 
holds aloof from such low arts.” 

24. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans, while 
living on food provided by the faithful, earn their living by wrong means 
of livelihood, by such low arts as foretelling: 

(1) There will be an eclipse of the Moon. 

(2) There wilt be an eclipse of the Sun. 

(3) There will be an eclipse of a Star (Nakshatra). 

(4) There will be aberration of the Sun or the Moon. 

(5) The Sun or the Moon will return to its usual path. 

(6) There will be aberrations of the Stars. 

(7) The Stars will return to their usual course. 

(8) There will be a fall of meteors. 

(9) There will be a jungle fire. 

(10) There will be an earthquake. 

(11) The God will thunder. 

(12-15) There will be rising and setting, clearness and dimness of the Sun 
or the Moon or the stars, or foretelling of each of these fifteen phenomena 
that they will betoken such and such a result.” Gotama the recluse holds 
aloof from such low arts. 

25. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans, while living 
on food provided by the faithful, earn their living by wrong means of the 
livelihood, by low arts, such as these: 

Foretelling an abundant rainfall. 

Foretelling a deficient rainfall. 

Foretelling a good harvest. 

Foretelling scarcity of food. 

Foretelling tranquility. 

Foretelling disturbances. 

Foretelling a pestilence. 

Foretelling a healthy season. 

Counting on the fingers. 

Counting without using the fingers. 

Summing up large totals. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


185 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 185 

Composing ballads, poetizing. 

Casuistry, sophistry. 

Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such low arts.” 

26. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans, while 
living on food provided by the faithful, earn their living by wrong means 
of livelihood, by low arts, such as: 

(1) Arranging a lucky day for marriages in which the bride or 
bridegroom is brought home. 

(2) Arranging a lucky day for marriages in which the bride or 
bridegroom is sent forth. 

(3) Fixing a lucky time for the conclusion of treaties of peace (or 
using charms to procure harmony) 

(4) Fixing a lucky time for the outbreak of hostilities (or using charms 
to make discord). 

(5) Fixing a lucky time for the calling in of debts (or charms for 
success in throwing dice). 

(6) Fixing a lucky time for the expenditure of money (or charms to 
bring ill luck to an opponent throwing dice). 

(7) Using charms to make people lucky. 

(8) Using charms to make people unlucky. 

(9) Using charms to procure abortion. 

(10) Incantations to keep a man’s jaws fixed. 

(11) Incantations to bring on dumbness. 

(12) Incantations to make a man throw up his hands. 

(13) Incantations to bring on deafness. 

(14) Obtaining oracular answers by means of the magic mirror. 

(15) Obtaining oracular answers through a girl possessed. 

(16) Obtaining oracular answers from a god. 

(17) The worship of the Sun. 

(18) The worship of the Great One. 

(19) Bringing forth flames from one’s mouth. 

(20) Invoking Siri, the goddess of Luck. 

Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such low arts.” 

27. Or he might say: “Whereas some recluses and Brahmans, while 
living on food provided by the faithful, earn their living by wrong means 
of livelihood, by low arts, such as these: 

(1) Vowing gifts to a god if a certain benefit be granted. 

(2) Praying such vows. 

(3) Repeating charms while lodging in an earth house. 

(4) Causing virility. 

(5) Making a man impotent. 

(6) Fixing on lucky sites for dwellings. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


186 


186 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(7) Consecrating sites. 

(8) Ceremonial rinsings of the mouth. 

(9) Ceremonial bathings. 

(10) Offering sacrifices. 

(11-14) Administering emetics and purgatives. 

(15) Purging people to relieve the head (that is by giving drugs to make 
people sneeze). 

(16) Oiling people’s ears (either to make them grow or to heal sores on 
them). 

(17) Satisfying people’s eyes (soothing them by dropping medicinal oils 
into them). 

(18) Administering drugs through the nose. 

(19) Applying collyrium to the eyes. 

(20) Giving medical ointment for the eyes. 

(21) Practising as an oculist. 

(22) Practising as a surgeon. 

(23) Practising as a doctor for children. 

(24) Administering roots and drugs. 

(25) Administering medicines in rotation. 

Gotama the recluse holds aloof from such low arts.” 

‘These brethren, are the trifling matters, the minor details of morality, 
of which the unconverted man, when praising the Tathagata, might speak.’ 


Here end the Long Paragraphs on Conduct. 

Ill 

This was indeed the highest standard for a moral life for an individual 
to follow. So high a standard of moral life was quite unknown to the Aryan 
Society of his day. 

He did not stop merely with setting an example by leading a life of purity. 
He also wanted to mould the character of the ordinary men and women 
in society. For their guidance he devised a form of baptism which was 
quite unknown to the Aryan Society. The baptism consisted in the convert 
to Buddhism undertaking to observe certain moral precepts laid down by 
Buddha. These precepts are known as Panch Sila or the five precepts. They 
are; (1) Not to kill, (2) Not to steal, (3) Not to lie, (4) Not to be unchaste 
and (5) Not to drink intoxicants. These five precepts were of the laity. For 
the Monks there were five additional precepts: (6) Not to eat at forbidden 
times, (7) Not to dance, sing, or attend theatrical or other spectacles, (8) To 
abstain from the use of garlands, scents, and ornaments, (9) To abstain from 
the use of high or broad beds, and (10) Never to receive money. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


187 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 187 

These Silas or precepts formed the moral code which it was intended 
should regulate the thoughts and actions of men and women. 

Of these the most important one was the precept not to kill. 
Buddha took care to make it clear that the precept did not merely 
mean abstension from taking life. He insisted that the precept must 
be understood to mean positive sympathy, good will, and love for 
everything that breathes 

He gave the same positives and extended content to other precepts. 
One of the Buddha’s lay followers once reported to him the teaching 
of a non-Buddhist ascetic, to the effect that the highest ideal consisted 
in the absence of evil deeds, evil words, evil thoughts, and evil life. 
The Buddha’s conment upon this is significant. “If, said he, “this were 

true, then every suckling child would have attained the ideal of life 

life is knowledge of good and evil; and after that the exchange of evil 
deeds, words, thoughts, and life, for good ones. This is to be brought 
about only by a long and determined effort of the will” 

Buddha’s teachings were not merely negative. They are positive 
and constructive. Buddha was not satisfied with a man following 
his precepts. He insisted upon encouraging others to follow them. 
For example in the Auguttara Nikaya the Buddha is quoted as 
distinguishing between a good man and a very good man by saying 
that one who abstains from killing, stealing, unchastity, lying and 
drunkenness may be called good; but only he deserves to be called very 
good who abstains from these evil things himself and also instigates 
others to do the like 

As has been well said the two cardinal virtues of Buddhism are 
love and wisdom. 

How deeply he inculcated the practice of love as a virtue is clear 
from his own words. “As a mother at the risk of her life watches 
over her own child, her only child, so also let every one cultivate a 
boundless loving mind towards all beings. And let him cultivate good 
will towards, all the world, a boundless (loving) mind above and below 
and across, unobstructed, without hatred, without enmity. This way 
of living is the best in the world.” So taught Buddha 1 . 

“Universal pity, sympathy for all suffering beings, good will to 
every form of sentient life, these things characterized the Tathagath 
(Buddha) as they have few others of the sons of men; and he succeeded 
in a most surprizing degree in handing on his point of view to his 
followers .” 2 

1 Sutta Nipata. 

2 Pratt — Buddhism, p. 49. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


188 


188 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Buddha held to the doctrine of wisdom as firmly as he did to the 
doctrine of love. He held that moral life began with knowledge and 
ended with wisdom, he “came to save the world, and his method for the 
accomplishment of this end was the destruction of ignorance and the 
dissemination of knowledge as to the true values of life and the wise way 
to live.” Buddha did not arrogate to himself the power to save people. 
People had to do that for themselves. And the way to save lay through 
knowledge. So much insistance did he place upon knowledge that he did 
not think that morality without knowledge was virtue. 

There are three things against which Buddha carried on a great 
campaign. 

He repudiated the authority of the Vedas 

Secondly he denounced the Yadna as a form of religion. The attitude 
of Buddha towards Yadna is well stated in the Jatakamala in the form 
of a story. The story runs thus: 

THE STORY OF THE SACRIFICE 

Those whose hearts are pure do not act up to the enticement of the 
wicked. Knowing this, pure-hearted-ness is to be striven after. This will 
be taught by the following: 

Long ago the Bodhisattva, it is said, was a king who had obtained 
his kingdom in the order of hereditary succession. He had reached 
this state as the effect of his merit, and ruled his realm in peace, not 
disturbed by any rival, his sovereignty being universally acknowledged. 
His country was free from any kind of annoyance, vexation or disaster, 
both his home relations and those with foreign countries being quite in 
every respect; and all his vessels obeyed his commands. 

1. This monarch having subdued the passions, his enemies, felt no 
inclination for such profits as are to be blamed when enjoyed, but was 
with his whole heart intent on promoting the happiness of his subjects. 
Holding virtuous practice (dharma) the only purpose of his actions, he 
behaved like a Muni. 

2. For he knew the nature of mankind, that people set a high value 
on imitating the behaviour of the highest. For this reason, being desirous 
of bringing about salvation for his subjects, he was particularly attached 
to the due performance of his religious duties. 

3. He practised almsgsiving, kept strictly the precepts of moral conduct 
(sila), cultivated forbearance, strove for the benefit of the creatures. His 
mild countenance being in accordance with his thoughts devoted to the 
happiness of his subjects, he appeared like the embodied Dharma. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


189 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 189 

Now it once happened that, though protected by his arm, his realm, both 
in consequence of the faulty actions of its inhabitants and inadvertance 
on the part of the angels charged with the care of rain, was afflicted 
in several districts by drought and the troublesome effects of such a 
disaster. Upon this the king, fully convinced that his plague had been 
brought about by the violation of righteousness by himself or his subjects, 
and taking much to heart the distress of his people, whose welfare was 
the constant object of his thoughts and cares, took the advice of men 
of acknowledged competence, who were reputed for their knowledge 
in matters of religion. So keeping counsel with the elders among the 
Brahmans, headed by his family priest (purohita) and his ministers, he 
asked them for some means of putting an end to that calamity. Now 
they believing a solemn sacrifice as is enjoined by the Veda to be a 
cause of abundant rain, explained to him that he must perform such a 
sacrifice of a frightful character, inasmuchas it requires the massacre of 
many hundreds of living beings. But after being informed of everything 
concerning such a slaughter as is prescribed for the sacrifice, his innate 
compassionateness forbade him to approve of their advice in his heart; 
yet out of civility, unwilling to offend them by harsh words of refusal, 
he slipped over this point, turning the conversation upon other topics. 
They, on the other hand, no sooner caught the opportunity of conversing 
with the king on matters of religion, than they once more admonished 
him to accomplish the sacrifice, for they did not understand his deeply 
hidden mind. 

4. “You constantly take care not to neglect the proper time of performing 
your different royal duties, established for the sake of obtaining the 
possession of land and ruling it. The due order of these actions of yours 
is in agreement with the precepts of Righteousness (dharma). 

5. “How then is this that you who (in all other respects) are so clever 
in the observance of the triad (of dharma, artha, and kama), bearing 
your bow to defend the good of your people, are so careless and almost 
sluggish as to that bridge to the world of the Devas, the name of which 
is ‘sacrifice’? 

6. “Like servants, the kings (your vassel) revere your commands, 
thinking them to be the surest gage of success. Now the time is come, O 
destroyer of your foes, to gather by means of sacrifice superior blessings, 
which are to procure for you a shining glory. 

7. 8. ‘Certainly, that holiness which is the requisite for a dikshita is 
already yours, by reason of your habitual practice of charity and your 
strictness in observing the restraint (of good conduct). Nevertheless, it 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


190 


190 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

would be fit for you to discharge your debt to the Devas by such sacrifices 
as are the subject matter of the Veda. The deities being satisfied by 
duly and faultlessly performed sacrifice, honour the creatures in return 
by (sending) rain. Thus considering, take to mind the welfare of your 
subjects and your own, and consent to the performance of a regular 
sacrifice which will enhance your glory.’ 

Thereupon he entered upon this thought; ‘Very badly guarded is 
my poor person indeed, being given in trust to such leaders. While 
faithfully believing and loving the law, I should uproot my virtue of 
tenderheartedness by reliance upon the words of others. For, truly.’ 

9. Those who are reputed among men to be the best refuge are the 
very persons who intend to do harm, borrowing their arguments from the 
Law. Alas! such a man who follows the wrong path shown by them, will 
soon find himself driven to straits, for he will be surrounded by evils. 

10. What connections may there be, forsooth, between righteousness 
and injuring animals? How my residence in the world of the Devas or 
propitiation of the deities have anything to do with the murder of victims? 

11. 12. The animal slaughtered according to the rites with the prescribed 
prayers, as if those sacred formulas were so many darts to wound it, 
goes to heaven, they say, and with this object it is killed. In this way 
that action is interpreted to be done according to the Law. Yet it is a 
lie. For how is it possible that in the next world one should reap the 
fruits of what has been done by others ? And by what reason will the 
sacrificial animal mount to heaven, though he has not abstained from 
wicked actions, though he has not devoted himself to the practice of 
good ones, simply because he has been killed in sacrifice, and not on 
the ground of his own actions? 

13. And should the victim killed in sacrifice really go to heaven, 
should we not expect the Brahmans to offer themselves to be immolated 
in sacrifice? A similar practice, however, is nowhere seen among them. 
Who, then, may take to heart the advice proffered by these counsellors? 

14. As to the Celestials, should we believe that they who are wont 
to enjoy the fair ambrosia of incomparable scent, flavour, magnificence, 
and effective power, served to them by the beautiful Apsaras, would 
abandon it to delight in the slaughter of a pitiable victim, that they 
might feast on the omentum and such other parts of his body as are 
offered to them in sacrifice? 

‘Therefore, it is the proper time to act so and so.’ Having thus made 

up his mind, the king feigned to be eager to undertake the sacrifice; 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


191 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 191 

and in approval of their words he spoke to them in this manner; 
‘Verily, well protected am I, well gratified, having such counsellors as 
Your Lordships are, thus bent on securing my happiness ! Therefore 
I will have a human sacrifice (purushamedha) of a thousand victims 
performed. Let my officials, each in his sphere of business, be ordered 
to bring together the requisites necessary for that purpose. Let also 
an inquiry be made of the most fitting ground whereon to raise the 
tents and other buildings for the sattra. Further, the proper time 
for the sacrifice must be fixed (by the astrologers) examining the 
auspicious lunar days, karanas, muhurtas, and constellations.’ The 
purohtta answered; ‘In order to succeed in your enterprise, Your 
Majesty ought to take the Avabhritha (final bath) at the end of one 
sacrifice; after which you may successively undertake the others. For if 
the thousand human victims were to be seized at once, your subjects, 
to be sure, would blame you and be stirred up to great agitation on 
their account.’ These words of the purohita having been approved by 
the (other) Brahmans, the king replied: ‘Do not apprehend the wrath 
of the people, Reverands. I shall take such measures as to prevent 
any agitation among my subjects.’ 

After this the king convoked an assembly of the townsmen and 
the landsmen, and said: “I intend to perform a human sacrifice of a 
thousand victims. But nobody behaving honestly is fit to be designated 
for immolation on my part. With this in mind, 1 give you this advice: 
Whomsoever of you I shall henceforword perceive transgreassing the 
boundaries of moral conduct, despising my royal will, him I order to 
be caught to be a victim at my sacrifice, thinking such a one the stain 
of his family and a danger to my country. With the object of carrying 
this resolution into effect, I shall cause you to be observed by faultless 
and sharp-sighted emissaries, who have shaken off sleepy carelessness 
and will report to me concerning your conduct.’ 

Then the foremost of the assembly, folding their hands and bringing 
them to their foreheads, spoke: 

15, 16. ‘Your Majesty, all your actions tend to the happiness of your 
subjects, what reason can there be to despise you on that account? 
Even (God) Brahma cannot but sanction your behaviour. Your Majesty, 
who is the authority of the virtuous, be our highest authority. For this 
reason anything which pleases Your Majesty must please us too. Indeed, 
you are pleased with nothing else but our enjoyment and our good.’ 

After then, noteables both of the town and the country had accepted 
his command in this manner; the king dispersed about his towns 
and all over his country, officers notified as such by their outward 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


192 


192 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

appearance to the people, with the charge of laying hold of the evil doers, 
and everywhere he ordered proclamations to be made by beat of drum 
day after day, of this kind: 

17. The King, a granter of security as he is, warrants safety to every 
one who constantly cultivates honesty and good conduct, in short, to the 
virtuous, yet, intending to perform a human sacrifice for the benefit of 
his subjects, he wants human victims by thousands to be taken out of 
those who delight in misconduct. 

18. ‘Therefore, whosoever henceforward, licentiously indulging in 
misbehaviour, shall disregard the command of our monarch, which is 
even observed by the kings, his vassels, shall be brought to the state 
as a sacrificial victim by the very force of his own actions, and people 
shall witness his miserable suffering, when he shall pine with pain, his 
body being fastened to the sacrificial post.’ 

When the inhabitants of that realms became aware of their king’s 
careful search after evil-doers with the aim of destining them to be victims 
at his sacrifice — for they heard the most frightful royal proclamation 
day after day and saw the king’s servants, who were appointed to look 
out for wicked people and to seize them, appearing every now and then 
everywhere — they abandoned their attachment to bad conduct, and grew 
intend on strictly observing the moral precepts and self-control. They 
avoided every occasion of hatred and enmity, and settling their quarrels 
and differences, cherished mutual love and mutual esteem. Obedience 
to the words of parents and teachers, a general spirit of liberality and 
sharing with others, hospitality, good manners, modesty, prevailed among 
them. In short, they lived as it were in the Krita Yuga. 

19. The fear of death had awakened in them thoughts of the next 
world; the risk of tarnishing the honour of their families had stirred 
their care of guarding their reputation; the great purity of their hearts 
had strengthened their sense of shame. These factors being at work, 
people were soon distinguished by their spotless behaviour. 

20. Even though every one became more than ever intend on keeping 
a righteous conduct, still the king’s servants did not diminish their 
watchfulness in the pursuit of the evil-doers. This also contributed to 
prevent people from falling short of righteousness. 

21. The king, learning from his emissaries this state of things in 
his realm, felt extremely rejoiced. He bestowed rich presents on those 
messengers as a reward for the good news they told him, and enjoined 
his ministers, speaking something like this: 

22-24. ‘The protection of my subjects is my highest desire, you 
know. Now, they have become worthy to be recipients of sacrificial 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


193 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 193 

gifts, and it is for the purpose of my sacrifice that I have provided this 
wealth. Well, I intend to accomplish my sacrifice in the manner which 
I have considered to be the proper once. Let every one who wishes for 
money, that it may be fuel for his happiness, come and accept it from 
my hand to his heart’s content. In this way the distress and poverty, 
which is vexing our country, may be soon driven out. Indeed, whenever 
I consider my own strong determination to protect my subjects and the 
great assistance I derive from you, my excellent companions in that task, 
it often seems to me as though those sufferings of my people, by exciting 
my anger, were burning in my mind like a blazing fire.’ 

The ministers accepted the royal command and anon went to execute 
it. They ordered alms-halls to be established in all villages, towns, and 
markets, likewise at all stations on the roads. This being done, they 
caused all who begged in order to satisfy their wants, to be provided 
day after day with a gift of those objects, just as had been ordered by 
the king. 

25. So poverty disappeared, and the people, having received wealth 
from the part of the king, dressed and adorned with manifold and fine 
garments and ornaments, exhibited the splendour of festival days. 

26. The glory of the king, magnified by the eulogies of the rejoiced 
recipients of his gifts, spread about in all directions in the same way, 
as the flowerdust of the lotuses carried forth by the small waves of a 
lake, extends, itself over a larger and larger surface. 

27. And after the whole people, in consequence of the wise measures 
taken by their ruler, had become intent on virtuous behaviour, the 
plagues and calamities, overpowered by the growth of all such qualities 
as conduce to prosperity, faded away, having lost their hold. 

28. The seasons succeeded each other in due course, rejoicing everybody 
by their regularity, and like kings newly established, complying with the 
lawful order of things. Consequently the earth produced the various kinds 
of corn in abundance, and there was fulness of pure and blue water and 
lotuses in all waterbasins. 

29. No epidemics afflicted mankind; the medicinal herbs possessed 
their efficacious virtues more than ever; monsoons blew in due time and 
regularly; the planets moved along in auspicious paths. 

30. Nowhere there existed any danger to be feared, either from abroad, 
or from within, or such as might be caused by dangerous derangements 
of the elements. Continuing in righteousness and self-control, cultivating 
good behaviour and modesty, the people of that country enjoyed as it 
were the prerogatives of the Krita Yuga. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


194 


194 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

By the power, then, of the king performing his sacrifice in this manner 
in accordance with (the precepts of) the Law, the. sufferings of the indigent 
were put to an end together A with the plagues and calamities, and the 
country abounded in a prosperous and thriving population offering the 
pleasing aspect of felicity. Accordingly people never wearied of repeating 
benedictions on their king and extending his renown in all directions. 

One day, one of the highest royal officials, whose heart had been 
inclined to the (True) Belief, spoke thus to the king: “This is a true 
saying, in truth. 

31. “Monarchs, because they always deal with all kinds of business, 
the highest, the lowest, and the intermediate, by far surpass in their 
wisdom any wise men. 

“For, Your Majesty, you have obtained the happiness of your subjects 
both in this world and in the next, as the effect of your sacrifice being 
performed in righteousness, free from the blameable sin of animal- 
slaughter. The hard times are all over and the sufferings of poverty have 
ceased, since men have been established in the precepts of good conduct. 
Why use many words? Your subjects are happy. 

32. “The black antelope’s skin which covers your limbs has the 
resemblane of the spot on the bright Moon’s surface, nor can the natural 
loveliness of your demeanour be hindered by the restraint imposed on 
you by your being a dikshita. Your head, adorned with such hair-dress 
as is in compliance with the rites of the diksha, possesses no less lustre 
than when it was embellished with the splendour of the royal umbrella. 
And, last not least, by your largesses you have surpassed the renown 
and abated the pride of the famous performer of a hundred sacrifices. 

33. “As a rule, Oh, you wise ruler, the sacrifice of those who long for 
the attainment of some good, is a vile act, accompanied as it is by injury 
done to living beings. Your sacrifice, on the contrary, this monument of 
your glory, is in complete accordance with your lovely behaviour and 
your aversion to vices. 

34. “Oh! Happy are the subjects who have their protector in you ! It 
is certain that no father could be a better guardian to his children.” 

Another said: 

35. “ If the wealthy practise charity, they are commonly impelled 
to do so by the hopes they put in the cultivation of that virtue; good 
conduct too, may be accounted for by the wish to obtain high regard 
among men or the desire of reaching heaven after death. But such 
a practice of both, as is seen in your skill in securing the benefit of 
others, cannot be found but in those who are accomplished both in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


195 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 195 

learning and in virtuous exertions.” In such a way, then, those whose 
hearts are pure do not act up to the enticement of the wicked. Knowing 
this, pure-heartedness is to be striven after.” 

(In the spiritual lessons for princes, also this is to be said: 

‘Who to his subjects wishing good, himself exerts, 

Thus brings about salvation, glory, happiness. 

No other should be of a king the business.’ 

And it may be added as follows: ‘(The prince) who strives after 
material prosperity, ought to act in accordance wih the precepts of 
religion, thinking, a religious conduct of his subjects to be the source 
of prosperity.’ 

Further this is here to be said: ‘Injuring animals never tends to bliss, 
but charity, self-restraint, continence and the like have this power; for 
this reason he who longs for bliss must devote himself to these virtues. 
‘And also when discoursing on the Tathagata : ‘In this manner the Lord 
showed his inclination to care for the interests of the world, when he 
was still in his previous existences.’) 

IV 

Another powerful attack against Yadna is contained in his discourses 
known as Kutadanta Sutta. It is as follows: 

THE WRONG SACRIFICE AND THE RIGHT 

1. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One once, when going on a tour 
through Magadha, with a great multitude of the brethren, with about 
five hundred brethren, came to a Brahman village in Magadha called 
Khanumata. And there at Khanumata he lodged in the Ambalatthika 
pleasance. 

Now at that time the Brahman Kutadanta was dwelling at Khanumata, 
a place teeming with life, with much grassland and woodland and water 
and corn, on a royal domain presented him by Seniya Bimbisara the king 
of Magadha, as a royal gift, with power over it as if he were the king. 

And just then a great sacrifice was being got ready on behalf of 
Kutadanta the Brahman. And a hundred bulls, and a hundred steers, 
and a hundred heifers, and a hundred goats, and a hundred rams had 
been brought to the post for the sacrifice. 

2. Now the Brahmans and householders of Khanumata heard the 
news of the arrival of the Samana Gotama. And they began to leave 
Khanumata in companies and in bonds to go to the Ambalatthika 
pleasance. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


196 


196 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

3. And just then Kutandanta the Brahman had gone apart to the 
upper terrace of his house for his siesta; and seeing the people thus to 
go by, he asked his door-keeper the reason. And the doorkeeper told him. 

4. Then Kutandanta thought: T have heard that the Samana Gotama 
understands about the successful performance of a sacrifice with its 
threefold method and its sixteen accessory instruments. Now I don’t 
know all this, and yet I want to carry out a sacrifice. It would be well 
for me to go to the Samana Gotama, and ask him about it.’ 

So he sent his doorkeeper to the Brahmans and householders of 
Khanumata, to ask them to wait till he could go with them to call upon 
the Blessed One. 

5. But there were at that time a number of Brahmans staying at 
Khanumata to take part in the great sacrifice. And when they heard this 
they went to Kutadanta, and persuaded him on the same grounds as the 
Brahmans had laid before Sonadanda, not to go. But he answered them 
in the same terms as Sonadanda had used to those Brahmans. Then 
they were satisfied, and went with him to call upon the Blessed One. 

9. And when he was seated there Kutadanta the Brahman told the 
Blessed One what he had heard, and requested him to tell him about 
success in performing a sacrifice in its three modes and with its accessory 
articles of furniture of sixteen kinds. 

‘Well then, O Brahman, give ear and listen attentively and I will speak.’ 

‘Very well, Sir, ‘said Kutadanta in reply; and the Blessed One spoke 
as follows: 

10. ‘Long ago, O Brahman, there was a king by name Wide-realm(Maha 
Vigha), mighty, with great wealth and large property; with stores 
of silver and gold, of aids to enjoyment, of goods and corn; with his 
treasure-houses and his garners full. Now when King Wide-realm was 
once sitting alone in meditation, he became anxious at the thought: “I 
have in abundance all the good things a mortal can enjoy. The whole 
wide circle of the earth is mine by conquest to possess.’ Twere well if I 
were to offer a great sacrifice that should ensure me weal and welfare 
for many days.” 

And he had the Brahman, his chaplain, called; and telling him all 
that he had thought, he said: “Be I would fain, O Brahman, offer a 
great sacrifice-let the venerable one instruct me how-for my weal and 
my welfare for many days.” 

11. Thereupon the Brahman who was chaplain said to the king: 
“The king’s country. Sirs, is harrassed and harried. There are decoits 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


197 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 197 

abroad who pillage the villages and townships, and who make the roads 
unsafe. Were the king, so long as that is so, to levy a fresh tax, verily 
his majesty would be acting wrongly. But perchance his majesty might 
think: ‘I’ll soon put a stop to these scoundrels’ game by degradation and 
banishment, and fines and bonds and death!’ But their license cannot 
be satisfactorily put a stop to. The remnant left unpunished would still 
go on harassing the realm. Now there is one method to adopt to put a 
thorough end to this disorder. Whosoever there be in the king’s realm 
who devote themselves to keeping cattle and the farm, to them let his 
majesty the king give food and seed-corn. Whosoever there be in the 
king’s realm who devote themselves to trade, to them let his majesty 
the king give capital. Whosoever there be in the king’s realm who devote 
themselves to government service, to them let his majesty the king give 
wages and food. Then those men following each his own business, will no 
longer harass the realm; the king’s revenue will go up; the country will 
be quiet and at peace; and the populace, pleased one with another and 
happy; dancing their children in their arms, will dwell with open doors.” 

‘Then King Wide-realm, O Brahman, accepted the word of his chaplain, 
and did as he had said. And those men, following each his business, 
harassed the realm no more. And the King’s revenue went up. And the 
country became quiet and at peace. And the populace pleased one with 
another and happy, dancing their children in their arms, dwelt with 
open doors.’ 

12. ‘So King Wide-realm had his chaplain called, and said: “The 
disorder is at an end. The country is at peace. I want to offer that great 
sacrifice — let the venerable one instruct me how — for my weal and my 
welfare for many days.” 

‘Then let his majesty the king send invitations to whomsoever there 
may be in his realm who are Kshatriyas, vassals of his, either in the 
country or the towns; or who are ministers and officials of his, either 
in the country or the towns; or who are Brahmans of position, either in 
the country or the towns; or who are householders of substance, either 
in the country or the towns, saying: “I intend to offer a great sacrifice. 
Let the venerable ones give their sanction to what will be to me for weal 
and welfare for many days.” 

‘Then King Wide-realm, O Brahman, accepted the word of his chaplain, 
and did as he had said. And they each — Kshatriyas and ministers and 
Brahmans and householders — made alike reply: “Let his majesty the 
king celebrate the sacrifice. The time is suitable O King!” 

‘Thus did these four, as colleagues by consent, become wherewithal 
to furnish forth that sacrifice, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


198 


198 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

13. ‘King Wide-realm was gifted in the following eight ways: 

‘He was well born on both sides, on the mother’s side and on the father’s, 
of pure descent back through seven generations, and no slur was cast upon 
him, and no reproach, in respect of birth.’ 

‘He was handsome, pleasant in appearance, inspiring trust, gifted with 
great beauty of complexion, fair in colour, fine in presence, stately to behold.’ 

‘He was mighty, with great wealth, and large property, with stores of 
silver and gold, of aids to enjoyment, of goods and corn, with his treasure- 
houses and his garners full’ 

‘He was powerful, in command of an army, loyal and disciplined in four 
divisions (of elephants, cavalry, chariots, and bowmen), burning up, methinks, 
his enemies by his very glory.’ 

‘He was a believer, and generous, a noble giver, keeping open house, a 
well in spring whence Samanas and Brahmans, the poor and the wayfarers, 
beggars, and petitioners might draw, a doer of good deeds.’ 

‘He was learned in all kinds of knowledge.’ 

‘He knew the meaning of what had been said, and could explain, “This 
saying has such and such a meaning, and that such and such “. 

‘He was intelligent, expert and wise and able to think out things present 
or past or future. 

‘And these eight gifts of his, too, became where withal to furnish forth 
that sacrifice.’ 

14. ‘The Brahman, his chaplain was gifted in the following four ways: 

‘He was well born on both sides, on the mother’s and on the father’s, of 
pure descent back through seven generations, with no slur cast upon him, 
and no reproach in respect of birth. 

‘He was a student repeater who knew the mystic verses by heart, master 
of the three Vedas, with the indices, the ritual, the phonology, and the 
exegesis (as a fourth), and the legends as a fifth, learned in the idioms and 
the grammar, versed in Lokayata (Mature-lore) and in the thirty marks on 
the body of a great man. 

‘He was virtuous, established in virtue, gifted with virtue that had grown 
great. 

‘He was intelligent, expert, and wise; foremost, or at most the second, 
among those who hold out the ladle. 

‘Thus these four gifts of his, too became wherewithal to furnish forth that 
sacrifice.’ 

15. ‘And further, 0 Brahman, the chaplain, before the sacrifice had begun, 
explained to King Wide-realm the three modes: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


199 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 199 

‘Should his majesty the King, before starting on the great sacrifice, 
feel any such regret as : “Great, alas, will be the portion of my wealth 
used up herein,” let not the king harbour such regret. Should his majesty 
the King, whilst he is offering the great sacrifice, feel any such regret 
as: “Great, alas, will be the portion of my wealth used up herein “let 
not the king harbour such regret. Should his majesty the King, when 
the great sacrifice has been offered, feel any such regret as “Great, 
alas, will be the portion of my wealth used up herein,” let not the king 
harbour such regret.’ 

‘Thus did the chaplain, O Brahman, before the sacrifice, had begun, 
explained to King Wide-realm the three modes.’ 

16. ‘And further, O Brahman, the chaplain, before the sacrifice had 
begun, in order to prevent any compunction that might afterwards in 
ten ways, arise as regards those who had taken part therein, said: “Now 
there will come to your sacrifice, Sire, men who destroy the life of living 
things, and men who refrain therefrom, men who take what has not been 
given, and men who refrain therefrom, men who speak lies, and men 
who do not — men who slander and men who do not — men who speak 
rudely and men who do not — men who chatter vain things and men 
who refrain therefrom — men who covet and men who covet not — men 
who harbour illwill and men who harbour it not — men whose views are 
wrong and men whose views are right. Of each of these let them, who 
do evil, alone with their evil. For them who do well let your majesty 
offer, for them, Sire, arrange the rites, for them let the king gratify, in 
them shall our heart within find peace.” 

17. ‘And further, O Brahman, the chaplain, whilst the king was carrying 
out the sacrifice, instructed and aroused and incited and gladdened his 
heart in sixteen ways: “Should there be people who should say of the king, 
as he is offering the sacrifice: ‘King Wide-realm is celebrating sacrifice 
without having invited the four classes of his subjects, without himself 
having the eight personal gifts, without the assistance of a Brahman 
who has the four personal gifts.’ Then would they speak not acording 
to the fact. For the consent of the four classes has been obtained, the 
king had the eight, and his Brahman has the four, personal gifts. With 
regard to each and every one of these sixteen conditions the king may 
rest assured that it has been fulfilled. He can sacrifice, and be glad, and 
possess his heart in peace.” 

18. ‘And further, O Brahman, at that sacrifice neither were any oxen 
slain, neither goats, nor fowls, nor fatted pigs, nor were any kinds of 
living creatures put to death. No trees were cut down to be used as 
posts, no Dabha grasses mown to strew around the sacrificial spot. 
And the slaves and messengers and workmen there employed were 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


200 


200 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

driven neither by rods nor fear, nor carried on their work weeping with 
tears upon their faces. Whoso chose to help, he worked; whoso chose not 
to help, worked not. What each chose to do he did; what they chose not 
to do, that was left undone, With ghee and oil, and butter and milk, 
and honey and sugar only was that sacrifice accomplished. 

19. ‘And further, O Brahman, the Kshatriya vassels, and the ministers 
and officials, and the Brahmans of position, and the householders of 
substance, whether of the country or of the towns, went to King, Wide- 
realm, taking with them much wealth, and said,” This abundant wealth, 
Sire, have we brought hither for the king’s use. Let his majesty accept 
it at our hands!” 

“Sufficient wealth have I, my friends, laid up, the produce of taxation 
that is just. Do you keep yours, and take away more with you!” 

When they had thus been refused by the king, they went aside, and 
considered thus one with the other: “It would not beseem us now, were 
we to take this wealth away again to our own homes. King Wide-realm 
is offering a great sacrifice. Let us too make an after-sacrifice!” 

20. ‘So the Kshatriyas established a continual largesses to the east 
of the king’s sacrificial pit, and the officials to the south thereof, and 
the Brahmans to the west thereof, and the householders to the north 
thereof. And the things given, and the manner of their gift, was in all 
respects like unto the great sacrifice of King Wide-realm himself.’ 

‘Thus, O Brahman, there was a fourfold co-operation, and King Wide- 
realm was gifted with eight personal gifts, and his officiating Brahman 
with four. And there were three modes of the giving of that sacrifice. 
This, O Brahman, is what is called the due celebration of a sacrifice in 
its threefold mode and with its furniture of sixteen kinds. 

21. ‘And when he had thus spoken, those Brahmans lifted up their 
voices in tumult, and said: “How glorious the sacrifice, how pure its 
accomplishment!” But Kutadanta the Brahman sat there in silence. 

Then those Brahmans said to Kutadanta: ‘Why do you not approve 
the good words of the Samana Gotama as well-said?’ 

‘I do not fail to approve; for he who approves not as well-said 
that which has been -well spoken by the Samana Gotama, verily his 
head would split in twain. But I was considering that the Samana 
Gotama does not say: “Thus have 1 heard,” nor “Thus behoves it to 
be,” but says only, “Thus it was then,” or “It was like that then”. So 
I thought; “For a certainty the Samana Gotama himself must at that 
time have been King Wide-realm, or the Brahman who officiated for 
him at that sacrifice. Does the Venerable Gotama admit that he who 
celebrates such a sacrifice, or causes it to be celebrated, is reborn at the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


201 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 201 

dissolution of the body, after death, into some state of happiness in heaven ?” 

‘Yes, 0 Brahman, that I admit. And at that time I was the Brahman who, 
as chaplain, had that sacrifice performed.’ 

22. ‘Is there, 0 Gotama, any other sacrifice less difficult and less 
troublesome, with more fruit and more advantage still than this?’ 

‘Yes, 0 Brahman, there is.’ 

‘And what, 0 Gotama, may that be?’ 

‘The perpetual gifts kept up in a family where they are given specifically 
to virtuous recluses.’ 

23. ‘But what is the reason, 0 Gotama, and what the cause, why such 
perpetual giving specifically to virtuous recluses, and kept up in a family, 
are less difficult and troublesome of greater fruit and greater advantage than 
that other sacrifice with its three modes and its accessories of sixteen kinds?’ 

‘To the latter sort of sacrifice, 0 Brahman, neither will the Arhata go, 
nor such as have entered on the Arhat way. And why not ? Because in it 
beating with sticks takes place, and seizing by the throat. But they will go 
to the former, where such things are not. And therefore are such perpetual 
gifts above the other sort of sacrifice.’ 

24. ‘And is there, 0 Gotama, any other sacrifice less difficult and less 
troublesome, of greater fruit and of greater advantage than either of these.’ 

Yes, 0 Brahman, there is.’ 

‘And what, 0 Gotama, may that be ?’ 

‘The putting up of a dwelling place (Vihara) on behalf of the Order in all 
the four directions.’ 

25. ‘And is there, 0 Gotama, any other sacrifice less difficult and less 
troublesome, of greater fruit and of greater advantage than each and all of 
these three?’ 

Yes, 0 Brahman, there is.’ 

‘And what, 0 Gotama, may that be?’ 

‘He who with trusting heart takes a Buddha as his guide, and the Truth, 
and the Order — that is a sacrifice better than open largeses, better than 
perpetual alms, better than the gift of a dwelling place.’ 

26. ‘And is there, 0 Gotama, any other sacrifice less difficult and less 
troublesome, of greater fruit and of greater advantage than all these four?’ 

‘When a man with trusting heart takes upon himself the precepts- 
abstinence from destroying life; absitence from taking what has not 
been given; abstinence from evil conduct in respect of lusts; abstinence 
from lying words; abstinence from strong, intoxicating, maddening 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


202 


202 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

drinks, the root of carelessness, that is a sacrifice better than open largesses, 
better than perpetual alms, better than the gift of dwelling places, better 
than accepting guidance.’ 

27. ‘And is there, O Gotama; any other sacrifice less difficult and less 
troublesome, of greater fruit and of greater advantage than all these five?’ 

‘Yes, O Brahman, there is.’ 

‘And what, O Gotama, may that be-?’ 

(The answer is the long passage from the Samana-phale Sutta 40, p. 62 
(of the text,) down to 75 (p. 74) on the First Ghana, as follows: 

1. The Introductory paragraphs on the appearance of a Buddha, his 
preaching, the conversion of a hearer, and his renunciation of the world. 

2. The Silas (minor morality). 

3. The paragraph on Confidence. 

4. The paragraph on ‘Guarded is the door of his senses.’ 

5. The paragraph on ‘Mindful and self possessed.’ 

6. The paragraph on Content. 

7. The paragraph on Solitude. 

8. The paragraph on the Five Hindrances. 

9. The description of the First Ghana.) 

‘This, O Brahman, is a sacrifice less difficult and less troublesome, of 
greater fruit and greater advantage than the previous sacrifices, 

(The same is then said the Second, Third, and Fourth Ghanas, in 
succession (as in the Samannao-phalo Sutas 77-82) and of the Insight 
arising from knowledge (ibid 83, 84), and further (omitting direct mention 
either way of 85-96 inclusive) of the knowledge of the destruction of the 
Asavas, the deadly intoxications or floods (ibid. 97-98). 

‘And there is no sacrifice man can celebrate, O Brahman, higher and 
sweeter than this.’ 

28. And when he had thus spoken, Kutadanta the Brahman said to the 
Blessed One: 

‘Most excellent, O Gotama, are the words of thy mouth, most excellent! 
Just as if a man were to set up what has been thrown down, or were to reveal 
that which has been hidden away, or were to point out the right road to him 
who has gone astray, or were to bring a light into the darkness so that those 
who had eyes could see external forms — just even so has the truth been made 
known to me in many a figure by the Venerable Gotama. I, even I, betake 
myself to the Venerable Gotama as my guide, to the Doctrine and the Order. 
May the Venerable One accept me as a disciple, as one who, from this day 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


203 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 203 

forth, as long as life endures has taken him as his guide. And I myself, 
O Gotama, will have the seven hundred bulls, and the seven hundred 
steers, and the seven hundred heifers, and the seven hundred goats, 
and the seven hundred rams set free. To them I grant their life. Let 
them eat green grass and drink fresh water, and may cool breezes waft 
around them.’ 

29. Then the Blessed One discoursed to Kutadanta the Brahman in 
due order; that is to say, he spake to him of generosity, of right conduct, 
of heaven, of the danger, the vanity, and the defilement of lusts, of the 
advantages of rununciation. And when the Blessed One became aware that 
Kutadanta the Brahman had become prepared, softened, unprejudiced, 
upraised, and believing in heart then did he proclaim the doctrine the 
Buddhas alone have won; that is to say, the doctrine of sorrow, of its 
origin, of its cessation and of the Path. And just as a clean cloth, with 
all stains in it washed away, will readily take the dye, just even so did 
Kutadanta the Brahman, even while seated there, obtain the pure and 
spotless Eye for the Truth. And he knew whatsoever has a beginning, 
in that is inherent also the necesity of dissolution. 

30. And then the Brahman Kutadanta, as one who had seen the Truth, 
had mastered it, understood it, dived deep down into it. Who had passed 
beyond doubt, and put away perplexity and gained full confidence, who 
had become depedent on no other for his knowledge of the teaching of 
the Master, addressed the Blessed One and said: 

May the venerable Gotama grant me the favour of taking his tomorrow 
meal with me, and also the members of the Order with him.’ 

And the Blessed One signified, by silence, his consent. Then the 
Brahman Kutadanta, seeing that the Blessed One had accepted, rose 
from his seat, and keeping his right towards him as he passed, he 
departed thence. And at daybreak he had sweet food, both hard and 
soft, made ready at the pit prepared for his sacrifice and had the time 
announced to the Blessed One:’ It is time, O Gotama and the meal is 
ready.’ And the Blessed One, who had dressed early in the morning, 
put on his outer robe, and taking his bowl with him, went with the 
brethren to Kutadanta’s sacrificial pit, and sat down there on the seat 
prepared for him. And Kutadanta the Brahman satisfied the brethren 
with the Buddha at their head, with his own hand, with sweet food, 
both hard and soft, till they refused any more. And when the Blessed 
One had finished his meal, and cleansed the bowl and his hands, 
Kutadanta the Brahman took a low seat and seated himself beside him. 
And when he was thus seated, the Blessed One instructed and aroused 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


204 


204 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and incited and gladdened Kutadanta the Brahman with religious 
discourse; and then arose from his seat and departed thence. 

KUTADANTA SUTTA IS ENDED 
V 

Thirdly Buddha denounceed the caste system. The Caste System in 
its present form was not then existing. The bar against inter-dining 
and inter-marriage had not then become operative. Things were flexible 
and not rigid as they are now. But the principle of inequality which 
is the basis of the caste system had become well established and it 
was against this principle that Buddha carried on a determined and 
a bitter fight. How strongly was he opposed to the pretensions of the 
Brahmins for superiority over the other classes and how convincing 
were the grounds of his opposition are to be found in many of his 
dialogues. The most important one of these is known as the Ambattha 
Sutta. 

AMBATTHA SUTTA 

(A young Brahman’s rudeness and an old one’s faith). 

1. Thus have I heard. The Blessed One when once on a tour through 
the Kosala country with a great company of the brethren, with about 
five hundred brethern, arrived at a Brahman village in Kosala named 
Ikkhanankala; and while there he stayed in the Ikkhanankala Wood. 

Now at that time the Brahman Pokkharsadi was dwelling at 
Ukkattha, a spot teeming with life, with much grassland and woodland 
and corn, on a royal domain, granted him by King Pasenadi of Kosala 
as royal gift, with power over it as if he were the king. 

2. Now the Brahman Pokkharasadi heard the news: ‘They say that 
the Samana Gotama, of the Sakya clan, who went out from a Sakya 
family to adopt the religious life, has now arrived, with a great company 
of the brethren of his Order, at Ikkhanankala, and is staying there 
in the Ikkhanankala Wood. Now regarding that venerable Gotama, 
such is the high reputation that has been noised abroad: The Blessed 
One is an Arahat, a fully awakened one, abounding in wisdom and 
goodness, happy, with knowledge of the worlds, unsurpassed as a 
guide to mortals willing to be led, a teacher for gods and men, a 
Blessed One, a Buddha. He, by himself, thoroughly knows and sees, 
as it were, face to face this universe, including the worlds above of 
the gods, the Brahmans, and the Maras, and the world below with its 
recluses and Brahmans, its princes and peoples, and having known it, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


205 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 205 

he makes his knowldge known to others. The truth, lovely in its origin, 
lovely in its progress, lovely in its consummation, doth he proclaim, both 
in the spirit and in the letter, the higher life doth he make known, in 
all its fullness and in all its purity. 

‘And good is it to pay visits to Arahats like that.’ 

3. Now at the time a young Brahman, an Ambattha, was a pupil 
under Pokkharasadi the Brahman. And he was a repeater (of the sacred 
words) knowing the mystic verses by heart, one who had mastered the 
Three Vedas, with the indices, the ritual, the phonology, and the exegesis 
(as a fourth), and the legends as a fifth learned in the idioms and the 
grammar, versed in Lokayata sophistry and in the theory of the signs 
on the body of a great man — so recognised an authority in the system 
of the threefold Vedic knowledge as expounded by his master, that he 
could say of him: ‘What I know that you know, and what you know 
that I know.’ 

4. And Pokkharasadi told Ambattha the news, and said : ‘Come now, 
dear Ambattha, go to the Samana Gotama, and find out whether the 
reputation so noised abroad regarding him is in accord with the facts or 
not, whether the Samana Gotama is such as they say or not’. 

5. ‘But how, Sir, shall I know whether that is so or not ?’ 

‘There have been handed down, Ambattha, in our mystic verses thirty- 
two bodily signs of a great man, — signs which, if a man has, he will 
become one of two things, and no other. If he dwells at home he will 
become a sovereign of the world, a righteous king, bearing rule even 
to the shores of the four great oceans, a conqueror, the protector of his 
people, possessor of the seven royal treasures. And these are the seven 
treasures that he has the Wheel, the Elephant, the Horse, the Gem, 
the Woman, the Treasurer, and the Adviser as a seventh. And he has 
more than a thousand sons, heroes, mighty in frame, beating down the 
armies of the foe. And he dwells in complete ascendancy over the wide 
earth from sea to sea, ruling it in righteousness without the need of 
baton or of sword. But if he go forth from the household life into the 
houseless state, then he will become a Buddha who removes the veil 
from the eyes of the world. Now I, Ambattha, am a giver of the mystic 
verses; you have received them from me.’ 

6. ‘Very good Sir, said Ambattha in reply; and rising from his seat 
and paying reverence to Pokkharasadi, he mounted a chariot drawn 
by mares, and proceeded, with a retinue of young Brahmans, to the 
Ikkhanankala Wood. And when he had gone on in the chariot as far as 
the road was practicable for vehicles, he got down, and went on, into 
the park, on foot. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


206 


206 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

7. Now at that time a number of the brethren were walking up and 
down in the open air. And Ambattha went up to them, and said: ‘Where 
may the Venerable Gotama be lodging now? We have come hither to 
call upon him.’ 

8. Then the brethren thought: ‘This young Brahman Ambattha is 
of distinguished family, and a pupil of the distinguished Brahman 
Pokkharasadi. The Blessed One will not find it difficult to hold 
conversation with such.’ And they said to Ambattha: ‘There Gotama 
is lodging, where the door is shut, go quietly up and enter the porch 
gently, and give a cough, and knock on the crossbar. The Blessed One 
will open the door for you.’ 

9. Then Ambattha did so. And the Blessed One opened the door, and 
Ambattha entered in. And the other young Brahmans also went in; and 
they exchanged with the Blessed One the greetings and compliments of 
politeness and courtesy, and took their seats. But Ambattha, walking 
about, said something or other of a civil kind in an off-hand way, fidgetting 
about the while, or standing up, to the Blessed One sitting there. 

10. And the Blessed One said to him; ‘Is that the way, Ambattha, 
that you would hold converse with aged teachers, and teachers of your 
teachers well stricken in years, as you now do, moving about the while 
or standing, with me thus seated?’ 

11. ‘Certainly not, Gotama. It is proper to speak, with a Brahman as 
one goes along only when the Brahman himself is walking and standing 
to a Brahman who stands, and seated to a Brahman who has taken his 
seat, or reclining to a Brahman who reclines. But with shavelings, sham 
friars, menial black fellows, the offscouring of our kinsman’s heels — with 
them I would talk as I now do to you.’ 

‘But you must have been wanting something, Ambattha, when you 
come here. Turn your thoughts rather to the object you had in view 
when you came. This young Brahman Ambattha is ill bred, though he 
prides himself on his culture; what can this come from except from want 
of training?’ 

12. Then Ambattha was displeased and angry with the Blessed One 
at being called rude; and at the thought that the Blessed One was vexed 
with him, he said, scoffing, jeering, and sneering at the Blessed One: 
‘Rough is this Sakya breed of yours, Gotama, and rude, touchy is this 
Sakya breed of yours and violent. Menials, mere menials, they neither 
venerate, nor value, nor esteem, nor give gifts to, nor pay honour to 
Brahmans. That, Gotama, is neither fitting, nor is it seemly.’ 

Thus did the young Brahman Ambattha for the first time charge the 
Sakyas with being menials. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


207 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 207 

13. ‘But in what then, Ambattha, have the Sakyas given you offence ?’ 

‘Once, Gotama, I had to go to Kapilvastu on some business or other 
of Pokkharasadi’s, and went into the Sakyas’ Congress Hall. Now at 
that time there were a number of Sakyas, old and young, seated in the 
hall on grand seats, making merry and joking together, nudging one 
another with their fingers; and for a truth, methinks, it was I myself 
that was the subject of their jokes; and not one of them even offered 
me a seat. That, Gotama, is neither fitting, nor is it seemly, that the 
Sakyas, menials, as they are, mere menials, should neither venerate, 
nor value, nor esteem, nor give gifts to, nor pay honour to Brahmans.’ 

Thus did the young Brahman Ambattha for the second time charge 
the Sakyas with being menials. 

14. ‘Why a quail Ambattha, little hen bird tough she be, can say what 
she likes in her own nest. And there the Sakyas are at their own home, in 
Kapilvastu. It is not fitting for you to take offence at so trifling a thing.’ 

15. ‘There are these four grades, Gotama, — the nobles, the Brahmans, 
the tradesfolk, and the work-people. And of these four, three — the nobles, 
the tradesfolk, and work-people — are, verily, but attendants on the 
Brahmans. So, Gotama, that is neither fitting nor is it seemly, that the 
Sakyas, menials as they are, mere menials should neither venerate, nor 
value, nor esteem, nor give gifts to, nor pay honour to the Brahmans.’ 

'*Thus did the young Brahman Ambattha for the third time charged 
the sakyes with being menials. 

16. Then the Blessed One thought thus:’ This Ambattha is very set on 
humbling the Sakyas with his charge of servile origin. What if I were 
to ask him as to his own lineage.’ And he said to him: 

‘And what family do you then, Ambattha, belong to?’ 

‘Yes, but if one were to follow up your ancient name and lineage, 
Ambattha, on the father’s and the mother’s side, it would appear that 
the Sakyas were once your masters, and that you are the offspring of 
one of their slave girls. But the Sakyas trace their line back to Okkaka 
the kings.’ 

‘Long ago, Ambattha, King Okkaka, wanting to divert the succession 
in favour of the son of his favourite queen, banished his elder children- 
Okkamukha, Karanda, Hatthinika, and Sinipura-from the land. And 
being thus banished they took up their dwelling on the slopes of the 
Himalaya, on the borders of a lake where a mighty oak tree grew. And 
through fear of injuring the purity of their line they intermarried with 
their sisters. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


208 


208 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

‘Now Okkaka the king asked the ministers at his court: “Where, Sirs, 
are the children now?” 

‘There is a spot, Sire, on the slopes of the Himalaya, on the borders 
of a lake, where there grows a mighty oak (sako). There do they dwell. 
And lest they should injure the purity of their line they have married 
their own (sakahi) sisters.’ 

‘Then did Okkaka the king burst forth in admiration: “Hearts of oak 
(sakya) are those young fellows! Right well they hold their own (parama 
sakya)!” 

‘That is the reason, Ambattha, why they are known as Sakyas. Now 
Okkaka had slave girl called Disa. She gave birth to a black baby. 
And no sooner was it born than the little black thing said, “Wash me, 
mother. Bathe me, mother. Set me free, mother of this dirt. So shall I 
be of use to you,” 

Now, just as now, Ambattha, people call devils, “devils”, so then they 
called devils, “black fellows” (kanhe). And they said, “This fellow spoke 
as soon as he was born.’ Tis a black thing (Kanha) that is born, a devil 
has been born!” And that is the origin, Ambattha, of the Kanhayanas. 
He was the ancestor of the Kanhayanas. And thus is it, Ambattha, that 
if one were to follow up your ancient name and lineae, on the father’s 
and on the mother’s side, it would appear that the Sakyas were once 
your masters, and that you are the offspring of one of their slave girls.’ 

17. When he had thus spoken the young Brahmans said to the Blessed 
One: ‘Let not the Venerable Gotama, humble Ambattha too sternly with 
this reproach of being descended from a slave girl. He is well born, 
Gotama, and of good family; he is versed in the sacred hymns, an able 
reciter, a learned man. And he is able to give answer to the Venerable 
Gotama in these matters. 

18. Then the Blessed One said to them: ‘Quite so. If you thought 
otherwise, then it would be for you to carry on our discussion further. 
But as you think so, let Ambattha himself speak.’ 

19. ‘We do not think so; and we will hold our peace. Ambattha is able 
to give answer to the venerable Gotama in these matters.’ 

20. Then the Blessed One said to Ambattha the Brahman: ‘Then this 
further question arises, Ambattha, a very reasonable one which even 
though unwillingly, you should answer. If you do not give a clear reply, 
or go off upon another issue, or remain silent, or go away, then your head 
will split in pieces on the spot. What have you heard, when Brahmans 
old and well stricken in years, teachers of yours or their teachers, were 
talking together, as to whence the Kanhayanas draw their origin, and 
who the ancestor was to whom they trace themselves back?’ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


209 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 209 

And when he had thus spoken Ambattha remained silent. And the 
Blessed One asked the same question again. And still Ambattha remained 
silent. Then the Blessed One said to him: ‘You had better answer, now, 
Ambattha. This is no time for you to hold your peace. For whosoever, 
Ambattha, does not, even up to the third time of asking, answer a 
reasonable question put by a Tathagata (by one who has won the truth), 
his head splits into pieces on the spot.’ 

21. Now at that time the spirit who bears the thunderbolt stood over 
above Ambattha in the sky with a mighty mass of iron, all fiery, dazzling, 
and aglow, with the intention, if he did not answer, there and then to 
split his head in pieces. And the Blessed One perceived the spirit bearing 
the thunderbolt, and so did Ambattha the Brahman. And Ambattha on 
becoming aware of it, terrified, startled, and agitated, seeking safety and 
protection and help from the Blessed One, crouched down besides him in 
awe, and said: ‘What was it the Blessed One said ? Say it once again!’ 

‘What do you think, Ambattha? What have you heard, when Brahmans 
old and well stricken in years, teachers of yours or their teachers, were 
talking together, as to whence the Kanhayanas draw their origin, and 
who the ancestor was to whom they trace themselves back?’ 

‘Just so, Gotama, did I hear, even as the Venerable Gotama hath said. 
That is the origin of the Kanhayana. and that the ancestor to whom 
they trace themselves back.’ 

22. And when he had thus spoken the young Brahmans fell into tumult, 
and uproar, and turmoil; and said: ‘Low born, they say, is Ambattha the 
Brahman; his family, they say, is not of good standing; they say he is 
descended from a slave girl; and the Sakyas were his masters. We did 
not suppose that the Samana Gotama. whose words are righteousness 
itself, was not a man to be trusted! 

23. And the Blessed One thought: ‘They go too far. these Brahmans in 
their depreciation of Ambattha as the offspring of a slave girl. Let me set 
him free from their reproach. ‘And he said to them:’ Be not too severe 
in disparaging Ambattha the Brahman on the ground of his descent. 
That Kanha became a mighty seer. He went into the Dekkan, there he 
learnt mystic verses, and returning to Okkaka the king, he demanded 
his daughter Madda-rupi in marriage. To him the king in answer said: 
“Who forsooth is this fellow, who son of my slave girl as he is — asks 
for my daughter in marriage:” and. angry and displeased, he fitted an 
arrow to his bow. But neither could he let the arrow fly. nor could he 
take it off the string again. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


210 


210 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Then the ministers and courtiers went to Kanha the seer, and said: “Let the 
king go safe. Sir, let the king go safe.” 

“The king shall suffer no harm. But should he shoot the arrow downwards, 
then would the earth dry up as far as his realm extends.” 

“Let the king, Sir, go safe, and the country too.” 

“The king shall suffer no harm, nor his land. But should he shoot the arrow 
upwards, the god would not rain for seven years as far as his realm extends.” 

“Let the king. Sir. go safe, and the country too.” 

“The king shall suffer no harm, nor his land. But should he shoot the arrow 
upwards, the god would not rain for seven years as far as his realm extends.” 

“Let the king. Sir, go safe, and the country too; and let the god rain.” 

“The king shall suffer no harm, nor the land either, and the god shall rain. 
But let the king aim the arrow at his eldest son. The prince shall suffer no harm, 
not a hair of him shall be touched.” 

‘Then, 0 Brahmans, the ministers told this to Okkaka, and said: “Let the 
king aim at his eldest son. He win suffer neither harm nor terror.” And the king 
did so, and no harm was done. But the king, terrified at the lesson given him, 
gave the man his daughter Madda-rupi as wife. You should not, 0 Brahmans, 
be too severe to disparage Ambattha in the matter of his slave-girl ancestry. 
That Kanha was a mighty seer,’ 

24. Then the Blessed One said to Ambattha; ‘What think you, Ambattha ? 
Suppose a young Kshatriya should have connection with a Brahman maiden, 
and from their intercourse a son should be born. Now would the son thus come 
to the Brahman maiden through the Kshatriya youth receive a seat and water 
(as token of respect) from the Brahmans? 

‘Yes, he would. Gotama.’ 

‘But would the Brahmans allow him to partake of the feast offered to the 
dead, or of the food boiled in milk, or of the offerings to the gods, or of food sent 
as a present?’ 

‘Yes, they would Gotama.’ 

‘But would the Brahmans teach him their verses or not?’ 

‘They would, Gotama.’ 

‘But would he be shut off, or not, from their women?’ 

‘He would not be shut off.’ 

‘But would the Kshatriyas allow him to receive the consecration ceremony 
of a Kshatriya?’ 

‘Certainly not. Gotama.’ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


211 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 211 

‘Because he is not of pure descent on the mother’s side.’ 

25. ‘Then what think you Ambattha? Suppose a Brahman youth should have 
connection with a Kshatriya maiden, and from their intercourse a son should be 
bom. Now would the son come to the Kshatriya maiden through the Brahman 
youth receive a seat and water (as token of respect) from the Brahmans?’ 

‘Yes, he would, Gotama.’ 

‘But would the Brahmans allow him to partake of the feast offered to the dead, 
or of food boiled in milk, or of an offering to the gods, or of food sent as a present?’ 

‘Yes, they would, Gotama.’ 

‘But would the Brahmans teach him their verses or not ?’ 

‘They would, Gotama.’ 

‘But would the Kshatriyas allow him to receive the consecration ceremony 
of a Kshatriya.’ 

‘Certainly not, Gotama.’ 

‘Why not that?’ 

‘Because he is not of pure descent on the father’s side.’ 

26. ‘Then, Ambattha, whether one compares women with women, or men with 
men, the Kshatriyas are higher and the Brahmans inferior. 

‘And what think you, Ambattha ? Suppose the Brahmans, for some offence 
or other, were to outlaw a Brahman by shaving him and pouring ashes over his 
head, were to banish him from the land from the township. Would he be offered 
a seat or water among the Brahmans?’ 

‘Certainly not, Gotama.’ 

‘Or would the Brahmans allow him to partake of the food offered to the dead, 
or of the food boiled in milk, or of the offerings to the gods, or of food sent as a 
present?’ 

‘Certainly not, Gotama.’ 

‘Or would the Brahmans teach him their verses or not?’ 

‘Certainly not, Gotama.’ 

‘And would he be shut off, or not, from their women?’ 

‘He would be shut off.’ 

27. ‘But what think you, Ambattha? If the Kshatriyas had in the same way 
outlawed a Kshatriya and banished him from the land or the township, would 
he, among the Brahmans, be offered water and a seat?’ 

‘Yes, he would, Gotama.’ 

‘And would he be allowed to partake of the food offered to the dead, or of the 
food boiled in milk, or of the offerings to the gods, or of food sent as a present?’ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


212 


212 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

‘He would, Gotama.’ 

‘And would the Brahmans teach him their verses?’ 

‘They would, Gotama?’ 

‘And would he be shut off, or not, from their women?’ 

‘He would not, Gotama.’ 

‘But thereby, Ambattha, the Kshatriya would have fallen into the deepest 
degradation, shaven as to his head, cut dead with the ash-basket, banished 
from land and townships. So that, even when a Kshatriya has fallen into 
the deepest degradation, still it holds good that the Kshatriyas are higher, 
and the Brahmans inferior. 

28. ‘Moreover it was one of the Brahma gods, Sanam-kumara, who uttered 
this stanza.” 

“The Kshatriya is the best of those among this folk who put their trust in 
lineage. 

But he who is perfect in wisdom and righteousness, he is the best among 
gods and men.” 

‘Now this stanza, Ambattha, was well sung and not ill sung by the Brahma 
Sanam-kumara. well said and not ill said, full of meaning and not void 
thereof. And 1 too approve it, 

‘I also’ Ambattha says: 

“The Kshatriya is the best of those among this folk who put their trust in 
lineage. 

But he who is perfect in wisdom and righteousness, he is the best among 
gods and men.” 

HERE ENDS THE FIRST PORTION FOR RECITATION 


1. ‘But what. Gotama, is the righteousness and what the wisdom spoken 
of in that verse?’ 

‘In the supreme perfection in wisdom and righteousness. Ambattha, there 
is no reference to the question either of birth, or of lineage, or of the pride 
which says: “You are held as worthy as I”, or ‘You are not held as worthy as 
I”. It is where the talk is of marrying, or giving in marriage, that reference 
is made to such things as that. For whosoever. Ambattha. are in bondage 
to the notions of birth or of lineage, or to the pride of social position, or of 
connection by marrige. they are far from the best wisdom and righteousness. 
It is only by having got rid of all such bondage that one can realise for 
himself that supreme perfection in wisdom and in conduct. 

2. ‘But what, Gotama. is that conduct, and what that wisdom?’ 

[Here follow, under ‘Morality’ (Sila)] 

The introductory paragraphs (40 42 of the ‘Samanaphala’ pp. 62, 
63 of the text) on the appearance of a Buddha, his preaching the 
conversion of a hearer, and his renunciation of the world: then come. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


213 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 213 

1. The Silas above pp. 4-12 (8-27) of the text. Only the refrain differs. 
It runs here, at the end of each clause, through the whole of this repeated 
passage: ‘This is reckoned in him as morality.’ 

Then under ‘Conduct’ (Karuna). 

2. The paragraph on ‘Confidence,’ above, p. 69 of the text 63. The refrain 
from here onwards is: This is reckoned to him as conduct. 

3. The paragraph on ‘Guarded is the door of the senses’ above, p. 70 of 
the text, 64. 

4. The paragraph on ‘Mindful and self-possessed,’ above, p. 70 of the text 65. 

5. The paragraph on ‘Content,’ above, p. 71 of the text, 66. 

6. The paragraph on ‘Solitude,’ above, p, 71 of the text, 67. 

7. The paragraphs on the ‘Five Hindrances,’ above pp, 71-2 of the text, 
68-74. 

8. The paragraphs on the ‘Four Rapt Contemplations’ above, 73-76, pp. 
75-82. The refrain at the end of each of them (‘higher and better than the 
last’) is here of course, to be read not as higher fruit of the life of a recluse, 
but as higher conduct. 

UNDER WISDOM (VIGGA) 

9. The Paragraphs on ‘Insight arising from Knowledge’ (Nana- dassanam), 
above, p. 76 of the text, 83, 84. The refrain from here onwards is: ‘This is 
reckoned in him as wisdom, and it is higher and sweeter than the last.’ 

10. The paragraphs on the Mental Image,’ above, p. 77 of the text 85, 86. 

11. The paragraphs on Mystic Gifts’ (Iddhi), above, p. 77 of the text, 87, 88. 

12. The paragrphs on the ‘Heavenly Ear’ (Dibbasota), above p. 79 of the 
text, 89, 90. 

13. The paragraphs on ‘Knowledge of the hearts of others ‘(Kato-pariya- 
nanam) above p. 79 of the text 91, 92. 

14. The paragraphs on Memory of one’s own previous births’ (Pubbe- 
nivasa-anussati-nama) above, p. 81 of the text, 93, 94. 

15. The paragraph on the ‘Divine Eye’ (Dibbakakkhu), above, p. 82 of the 
text, 95, 96. 

16. The paragraphs on the ‘Destruction of the Deadly Floods’ (Asavanam 
Khaya-nanam), above, p. 83 of the text. 97, 98. 

‘Such a man, Ambattha, is said to be perfect in wisdom, perfect in conduct, 
perfect in wisdom and conduct. And there is no other perfection in wisdom 
and conduct higher and sweeter than this.’ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


214 


214 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

3. ‘Now, Ambattha, to this supreme perfection in wisdom and goodness 
there are Four Leakages. And what are the four?’ 

‘In case, Ambattha, any recluse or Brahman, without having thoroughly 
attained unto this supreme perfection in wisdom and conduct, with his 
yoke on his shoulder (to carry fire-sticks, a water-pot, needles, and the 
rest of a mendicant friar’s outfit), should plunge into the depths of the 
forest, vowing to himself: “I will henceforth be one of those who live only 
on fruits that have fallen of themselves” — then, verily, he turns that out 
worthy only to be a servant unto him that hath attained to wisdom and 
rightsouness.’ 

‘And again, Ambattha, in case any recluse or Brahman, without having 
thoroughly attained unto this supreme perfection in wisdom and conduct, 
and without having attained to living only on fruits fallen of themselves, 
taking a hoe and a basket with him, should plunge into the depths of the 
forest, vowing to himself: “I will henceforth be one of those who live only 
on bulbs and roots of fruits.” Then, verily he turns out worthy only to 
be a servant unto him who hath attained to wisdom and righteousness.’ 

‘And again, Ambattha. in case any recluse or Brahman, without having 
thoroughly attained unto this supreme perfection in wisdom and conduct, 
and without having attained to living only on fruits fallen of themselves, 

and without having attained to living only on bulbs and’ roots and fruits, 

should build himself a fires-hrine near the boundries of some village or 
some town, and there dwell serving the fire-god, — then, verily he turns 
out worthy only to be a servant unto him that hath attained to wisdom 
and righteousness.’ 

‘And again, Ambattha, in case any recluse or Brahman, without having 
thoroughly attained unto this supreme perfection in wisdom and conduct, 
and without having attained to living only on fruits fallen of themselves, 

and without having attained to living only on bulbs and roots and fruits, 

and without having attained to serving the fire-god, should build himself 
a four-doored almshouse at a crossing where four high roads meet, and 
dwell there, saying to himself: “Whosoever, whether recluse or Brahman, 
shall pass here, from either of these four directions, him will I entertain 
according to my ability and according to my power — then, verily, he turns 
out worthy only to be a servant unto him who hath attained to wisdom 
and righteousness.’ 

‘These are the Four Leakages, Ambattha, to supreme perfection in 
righteousness and conduct.’ 

4. ‘Now what think you. Ambattha ? Have you, as one of a class of 
pupils under the same teacher, been instructed in this supreme perfection 
of wisdom and conduct?’ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


215 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 215 

‘Not that, Gotama. How little is it that I can profess to have learnt! 
How supreme this perfection of wisdom and conduct! Far is it from me 
to have been trained therein?’ 

‘Then what think you, Ambattha? Although you have not thoroughly 
attained unto this supreme perfection of wisdom and goodness, have you 
been trained to take the yoke upon your shoulders, and plunge into the 
depths of the forest as one who would fain observe the vow of living 
only on fruits fallen of themselves?’ 

‘Not even that, Gotama’. 

‘Then what think you Ambattha? Althougn you have not attained unto 
this supreme perfection of wisdom and goodness, nor have attained to 
living on fruits fallen of themselves, have you been trained to take hoe 
and basket, and plunge into the depths of the forest as one who would 
fain observe the vow of living only on bulbs and roots and fruits?’ 

‘Not even that, Gotama’ 

‘Then what think you, Ambattha? Althougn you have not attained 
unto this supreme perfection of wisdom and goodness, and have not 
attained to living on fruits fallen of themselves, and have not attained 
to living on bulbs and roots and fruits, have you been taught to build 
yourself a fire-shrine on the borders of some village or some town, and 
dwell there as one who would fain serve the fire-god?’ 

‘Not even that, Gotama.’ 

‘Then what think you, Ambattha ? Although you have not attained 
unto this supreme perfection of wisdom and goodness, and have not 
attained to living on fruits fallen of themselves, and have not attained to 
living on bulbs and roots and fruits, and have not attained to serving the 
firegod, have you been taught to build yourself a four-doored almshouse 
at a spot where four high roads cross, and dwell there as one who would 
fain observe the vow to entertain whosoever might pass that way, from 
any of the four directions, according to your ability and according to 
your power?’ 

‘Not even that. Gotama.’ 

5. ‘So then you, Ambattha, as a pupil, have fallen short of due 
training, not only in the supreme wisdom and conduct, but even in any 
one of the Four Leakages by which the complete attainment thereof 
is debarred. And your teacher too. the Brahman Pokkharasadi, has 
told you this saying : “Who are these shavelings, sham friars, menial 
black fellows, the offscouring of our kinsman’s heels, that they should 
claim converse with Brahmans versed in the threefold Vedic Lore!” 
he himself not having even fulfilled any one even of these lesser 
duties (which lead men to neglect the higher ones). See, Ambattha, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


216 


216 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

how deeply your teacher the Brahman Pokkharasadi has herein done 
you wrong.’ 

6. ‘And the Brhman Pokkharasadi Ambattha. is in the enjoyment of 
a grant from Pasenadi, the king of Kosala. But the king does not allow 
him to come into his presence. When he consults with him he speaks 
to him only from behind a curtain. How is it, Ambattha, that the very 
King, from whom he accepts this pure and lawful maintenance, King 
Pasendadi of Kosala, does not admit him to his presence? See, Ambattha, 
how deeply your teacher the Brahman Pokkharasadi, has herein done 
you wrong.” 

7. ‘Now what think you, Ambattha ? Suppose a king, either seated 
on the neck of his elephant or on the back of his horse, or standing on 
the footrug of his chariot, should discuss some resolution of state with 
his chiefs or princes, and suppose as he left the spot and stepped on 
one side, a workman (Sudra) or the slave of a workman should come 
up and. standing there, should discuss the matter, saying : “Thus and 
thus said Pasendadi the King.” Although he should speak as the king 
might have spoken, or discuss as the king might have done, would he 
thereby be the king, or even as one of his officers?’ 

‘Certainly not, Gotama.’ 

8. ‘But just so, Ambattha, those ancient poets (Rishis) of the Brahmans, 
the authors of the verses, the utterers of the verses whose ancient form 
of words so chanted, uttered, or composed the Brahmans of to-day chant 
over again and rehearse, intoning or reciting exactly as has been intoned 
or recited — to wit, Atthaka, Vamaka, Vamadeva, Yamataggi, Angirasa, 
Bharadvaja, Vasettha, Vessamitta, Kassapa, and Bhagu — though you 
can say: ‘I as a pupil know by heart their verses ‘that you should on 
that account by a Rishi, or have attained to the state of a Rishi — such 
a condition of things has no existence!’ 

9. ‘Now what think you, Ambattha ? What have you heard when 
Brahmans, old and well stricken in years, teachers of yours of their 
teachers, were talking together — did those ancient Rishis, whose verses 
you so chant over and repeat, parade about well groomed, perfumed, 
trimmed as to their hair and beard adorned with garlands and gems, 
clad in white garments, in the full possession and enjoyment of the five 
pleasures of sense, as you. and your teacher too, do now?’ 

‘Not that, Gotama.’ 

‘Or did they live, as their food, on boiled rice of the best sorts, from 
which all the black specks had been sought out and removed, and 
flavoured with sauces and curries of various kind as you, and your 
teacher too. do now?’ 


‘Not that. Gotama.’ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


217 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 217 

‘Or were they waited upon by women with fringes and furbelows round 
their loins, as you, and your teacher too, do now? 

‘Or did they go about driving chariots, drawn by mares with plaited 
manes and tails, using long wands and goads the while, as you, and your 
teacher too, do now?’ 

‘Not that Gotama.’ 

‘Or did they have themselves guarded in fortified towns, with moats 
dug out round them and Crossbars let down before the gates, by men girt 
with long swords, as you, and your teacher too, do now?’ 

‘Not that Gotama.’ 

10. ‘So then, Ambattha, neither are. you a Rishi, nor your teacher, 
nor do you live under the conditions under which the Rishis lived. But 
whatsoever it may be, Ambattha, concerning which you are in doubt or 
perplexity about me, ask me as to that, I will make it clear by explanation.’ 

11. Then the Blessed One went forth from his chamber, and began to 
walk up and down that Ambattha did the same. And as he thus walked 
up and down, following the Blessed One, he took stock of the thirty-two 
signs of a great man, whether they appeared on the body of the Blessed 
One or not. And he perceived them all save only two. With respect to those 
two — the concealed member and the extent of tongue — he was in doubt 
and perplexity, not satisfied not sure. 

12. And the Blessed One knew that he was so in doubt. And he so 
arranged matters by his Wondrous Gift that Ambattha the Brahman saw 
how that part of the Blessed One that ought to be hidden by clothes was 
enclosed in a sheath. And the Blessed One so bent round his tongue that 
he touched and stroked both his ears, touched and stroked both his nostrils, 
and the whole circumstance of his forehead he covered with his tongue. 

And Ambattha, the young Brahman, thought: ‘The Samana Gotama is 
endowed with the thirty-two signs of a great man, with them all, not only 
with some of them. 1 And he said to the Blessed One: ‘And now, Gotama, 
we would fain depart. We are busy and have much to do.’ 

‘Do Ambattha, what seemed to you fit.’ 

And Ambattha mounted his chariot drawn by mares, and departed thence. 

13. Now at that time the Brahman Pokkharasadi had gone forth 
from Ukkattha with a great retinue of Brahmans, and was seated in 
his own pleasance waiting there for Ambattha. And Ambattha came on 
to the pleasance. And when he had come in his chariot as far as the 
path was practicable for chariots, he descended from it, and came on 
foot to where Pokkharasadi was, and saluted him, and took his seat 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


218 


218 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

respectfully on one side. And when he was so seated, Pokkharasadi said 
to him. 

14. ‘Well, Ambattha! Did you see the Blessed One?’ 

‘Yes, Sir, we saw him.’ 

‘Well! is the Venerable Gotama so, as the reputation about him I told 
you of declares, and not otherwise. Is he such a one, or is he not?’ 

‘He is so, Sir, as his reputation declares, and not otherwise. Such is 
he, not different. And he is endowed with the thirty-two signs of a great 
man, with all of them, not only with some.’ 

‘And did you have any talk, Ambattha, with the Samana Gotama?’ 

‘Yes. Sir, I had.’ 

‘And how did the talk go?’ 

Then Ambattha told the Brahman Pokkharasadi all the talk that he 
had with the Blessed One. 

15. When he had thus spoken, Pokkharasadi said to him: ‘Oh. you 
wiseacre! Oh! you dullard! Oh! you expert, forsooth, in our threefold 
Vedic Lore! A man, they say, who should carry out his business thus, 
must, on the disolution of the body, after death, be reborn into some 
dismal state of misery and woe. What could the very points you pressed 
in your insolent words lead up to, if not to the very disclosures the 
venerable Gotama made? What a wiseacre, what a dullard; what an 
expert, forsooth, in our threefold Vedic lore !’ And angry and displeased, 
he struck out with his foot, and rolled Ambattha over. And he wanted, 
there and then, himself to go and call on the Blessed One. 

I. But the Brahmanas there spake thus to Pokkharasadi: ‘It is much 
too late. Sir, today to go to call on the Samana Gotama. The venerable 
Pokkharasadi can do so tomorrow. 

So Pokkharasadi had sweet food, both hard and soft, made ready at 
his own house, and taken on wagons, by the light of blazing torches, 
out to Ukkattha. And he himself went on to the Ikkhanankala Wood, 
driving in his chariot as far as the road was practicable for vehicles, 
and then going on, on foot, to where the Blessed One was. And when 
he had exchanged with the Blessed One the greetings and compliments 
of politeness and courtesy, he took his seat on one side, and said to the 
Blessed One: 

17. ‘Has our pupil, Gotama, the young Brahman Ambattha, been here?’ 

‘Yes, Brahman, he has.’ 

‘And did you, Gotama. have any talk with him? 

‘Yes, Brahman, I had. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


219 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 219 

‘And on what wise was the talk that you had with him? 

18. Then the Blessed One told the Brahman Pokkharasadi all the talk 
that had taken place. And when he had thus spoken Pokkharasadi said 
to the Blessed One: 

‘He is young and foolish, Gotama, that young Brahman Ambattha. 
Forgive him, Gotama.’ 

‘Let him be quite happy. Brahman, that young Brahman Ambattha’ 

19. And the Brahman Pokkharasadi took stock, on the body of the 
Blessed One, of the thirty two marks of a Great Being. And he saw 
them all plainly, save only two. As to two of them the sheath concealed 
member and the extensive tongue — he was still in doubt and undecided. 
But the Blessed One showed them to Pokkharasadi, even as he had 
shown them to Ambattha. And Pokkharasadi perceived that the Blessed 
One was endowed with the thirty two marks of a Great Being, with all 
of them, not only with some. And he said to the Blessed One: ‘May the 
venerable Gotama grant me the favour of taking his tomorrow’s meal 
with me, and also the members of the Order with him’ And the Blessed 
One accepted, by silence, his request. 

20. Then the Brahman Pokkharasadi, seeing that the Blessed One had 
accepted, had (on the morrow) the time announced to him : ‘It is time. 
Oh Gotama, the meal is ready.’ And the Blessed One. who had dressed 
in the early morning, put on his outer robe, and taking his bowl with 
him, went, with the brethren to Pokkharasadi’s house, and sat down on 
the seat prepared for him. And Pokkharasadi the Brahman, satisfied 
the Blessed One, with his own hand, with sweet food, both hard and 
soft, until he refused any more, and the young Brahmans the members 
of the Order. And when the Blessed One had finished his meal, and 
cleansed the bowl and his hands, Pokkharasadi took a low seat, and 
sat down beside him. 

21. Then to him thus seated the Blessed One discoursed in due order; 
that is to say, he spoke to him of generosity, of right conduct, of heaven, 
of the danger, the vanity, and the defilement of lusts, of the advantages 
of renunciation. And when the Blessed One saw that Pokkharasadi 
the Brahman, had become prepared, softened, unprejudiced, upraised, 
and believing in heart, then he proclaimed the doctrine the Buddhas 
alone have won; that is to say, the doctrine of sorrow, of its origin, of 
its cessation, and of the Path. And just as a clean cloth from which all 
stain has been washed away will readily take the dye, just even so did 
Pokkharasadi the Brahman, obtain, even while sitting there, the pure and 
spotless Eye for the Truth, and he knew: ‘Whatsoever has a beginning 
in that is inherent also the necessity of dissolution.’ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


220 


220 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

22. And then the Brahman Pokkarasadi as one who had seen the 
Truth, had mastered it, understood it, dived deep down into it, who had 
passed beyond doubt and put away perplexity and gained full confidence, 
who had become dependent on no other man for his knowledge of the 
teaching of the Master, addressed the Blessed One and said: 

‘Most excellent Oh Gotama (are the words of thy mouth), most 
excellent! Just as if a man were to set up that which has been thrown 
down, or were to reveal that which has been hidden away, or were to 
point out the right road to him who has gone astray, or were to bring 
a light into the darkness so that those who had eyes could see external 
forms, — just even so. Lord, has the truth been made known to me, in 
many a figure, by the venerable Gotama. And I, Oh Gotama, with my 
sons, and my wife, and my people, and my companions, betake myself 
to the venerable Gotama as my guide, to the truth, and to the Order. 
May the venerable Gotama accept me as a disciple, as one who, from 
this day forth, as long as life endures, has taken him as his guide. And 
just as the venerable Gotama visits the families of others, his disciples, 
at Ukkatha, so let him visit mine. Whosoever there may be there, of 
Brahmans or their wives, who shall pay reverence to the venerable 
Gotama. or stand up in his presence, or offer him a seat or water, or 
take delight in him, to him that will be for long, a cause of weal and 
bliss.’ 

‘It is well. Brahman, what you say.’ 

Here ends the Ambattha Sutta. 


VI 

In the matter of his opposition to Caste, Buddha practised what he 
preached. He did what the Aryan Society refused to do. In the Aryan 
Society the Shudra or low caste man could never become a Brahman. 
But Buddha not only preached against caste but admitted the Shudra 
and the low caste to the rank of a Bhikku who held the same rank in 
Buddhism as the Brahman did in Brahmanism. As Rhys Davis points 
out: (Quotation not given) 

In the first place, as regards his own Order, over which alone he had 
complete control, he ignores completely and absolutely all advantages 
or disadvantages arising from birth, occupation, and social status, and 
sweeping away all barriers and disabilities arising from the arbitrary 
rules of mere ceremonial or social impurity. 

One of the most distinguished members of his Order, the very one of 
them who was referred to as the chief authority after Gotama himself. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


221 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 221 

on the rules of the Order, was Upali, who had formerly been a barber, 
one of the despised occupations. So Sunita, one of the brethren whose 
verses are chosen for insertion in the Thera Gatha, was a Pukkusa, 
one of the low tribes. Sati, the propounder of a deadly heresy, was of 
the sons of the fisherfolk, afterwards a low caste, and even then an 
occupation, on account of its cruelty, particularly abhorred. Nanda was a 
cowherd. The two Panthakas were born out of wedlock, to a girl of good 
family through intercoure with a slave (so that by the rule laid down 
in Manu 31, they were actually outcasts). Kapa was the daughter of a 
deer-stalker, Punna and Punnika had been slave girls. Sumangalamata 
was daughter and wife to workers in rushes, and Subha was the daughter 
of a smith. More instances could doubtless be quoted and others will 
become known when more texts are published. 

It does not show much historical insight to sneer at the numbers 
as small, and to suggest that the supposed enlightenment or liberality 
was mere pretence. The facts speak for themselves; and the percentage 
of low-born members of the Order was probably in fair proportion to 
the percentage of persons belonging to the despised jatis and sippas as 
compared with the rest of the population. Thus of the Theris mentioned 
in the Theri Gatha we know the social position of sixty, of whom five 
are mentioned above — that is, 87, per cent of the whole number were 
base-born. It is most likely that this is just about the proportion which 
persons in similar social rank bore to the rest of the population. 

Just as Buddha levelled up the position of the Shudras and the 
low caste men by admitting them to the highest rank namely that 
of Bhikkus, he also levelled up the position of women. In the Aryan 
Society women were placed on the same position as the Shudras and 
in all Aryan literature women and Shudras are spoken of together as 
persons belonging to the same status. Both of them were denied the 
right to take Sanyas, as Sanyas was the only way open to salvation. 
Women and Shudras were beyond salvation. Buddha broke this Aryan 
rule in the case of women as he did in the case of the Shudras. Just 
as a Shudra could become a Bhikku so a woman could become a nun. 
This was taking her to the highest status then conceivable in the eyes 
of the Aryan Society. 

Another issue on which Buddha fought against the leaders of the 
Aryan Society was the issue of the Ethics of teachers and teaching. 
The leaders of the Aryan Society held the view that learning and 
education was the privilege of the Brahmins. Kshatriyas and Vaishyas. 
The Shudras were not entitled to education. They insisted that it 
would be danger to social order if they taught women or any males not 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


222 


222 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

twice-born. Buddha repudiated this Aryan doctrine. As pointed out by 
Rhys Davis on this question is “That everyone should be allowed to 
learn; that everyone, having certain abilities, should be allowed to teach; 
and that, if he does teach, he should teach all to all; keeping nothing 
back, shutting no one out.” In this connection reference may be made 
to the dialogue between Buddha and the Brahman Lohikka and which 
is known as the Lohikka Sutta. 

LOHIKKA SUTTA 

(Some points in the Ethics of Teaching) 

1. Thus have I heard. The Exalted One, when once passing on a tour 
through the Kosala districts with a great multitude of the members of 
the Order, with about five hundred Bhikshus, arrived at Salavatika. 
(village surrounded by a row of Sala trees). Now at that time Lohikka 
the Brahman was established at Salavatika, a spot teeming with life, 
with much grassland and woodland and corn, on a royal domain granted 
him by King Pasenadi of Kosala, as a royal gift, with power over it as 
if he were the king. 

2. Now at that time Lohikka the Brahman was thinking of harbouring 
the following wicked view; ‘Suppose that a Samana or a Brahmana 
have reached up to some good state (of mind), then he should tell no 
one else about it. For what can one man do for another? To tell others 
would be like the man who, having broken through an old bond, should 
entangle himself in a new one. Like that, I say, is this (desire to declare 
to others); it is a form of lust. For what can one man do for another?’ 

Now Lohikka the Brahman heard the news: ‘They say that the 
Samana Gotama, of the sons of the Sakyas, who went out from the 
Sakya clan to adopt the religious life, has now arrived, with a great 
company of the brethren of his Order, on his tour through the Kosala 
districts, at Salavatika. Now regarding that venerable Gotama, such 
is the high reputation that has been noised abroad: that Exalted One 
is an Arhat, fully awakened, abounding in wisdom and goodness, 
happy, with knowledge of the worlds, unsurpassed as a guide to 
mortals willing to be led, a teacher for gods and men, an exalted one, 
a Buddha. He, by himself thoroughly knows, and sees as it were face 
to face, this universe — including the worlds above of the gods, the 
Brahmans and the Maras; and the world below with its Samanas and 
Brahmans, its princes and peoples — and having known it, he makes his 
knowledge known to others. The truth, lovely in its origin, lovely in its 
progress, lovely in consummation, doth he proclaim both in the spirit 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


223 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 223 

and in the letter. The higher life doth he make known in all its fullness, 
and in all its purity. And good is it to pay visists to Arhats like that.’ 

4. Then Lohikka the Brahman said to Bhesika the barber, ‘Come now, 
good Bhesika, go where the Samana Gotama is staying, and on your 
arrival, ask in my name as to whether his sickness and indisposition 
as abated, as to his health and vigour and condition of ease; and speak 
thus: “May the venerable Gotama, and with him the brethren of the 
order, accept the tomorrow’s meal from Lohikka the Brahman.” 

5. ‘Very well. Sir.’ said Bhesika the barber, acquiescing in the word 
of Lohikka the Brahman, and did so even as he had been enjoined. And 
the Exalted One consented, by silence, to his request. 

6. And when Bhesika the barber perceived that the Exalted One had 
consented, he rose from his seat, and passing the Exalted One with 
his right hand towards him, went to Lohikka the Brahman, and on his 
arrival spake to him thus : 

‘We addressed that Exalted One, Sir, in your name, even as you 
commanded. And the Exalted One hath consented to come.’ 

7. Then Lohikka the Brahman, when the night had passed made 
ready at his own dwelling place sweet food, both hard and soft, and 
said to Bhesika the barber: ‘Come now, good Bhesika, go where the 
Samana Gotama is staying, and on your arrival, announce the time to 
him, saying: “It is time, O Gotama. and the meal is ready.” 

‘Very well. Sir’, said Bhesika the barber in assent to the words of 
Lohikka the Brahman; and did so even as he had been enjoined. 

And the Exalted One, who had robed himself early in the morning, 
went robed, and carrying his bowl with him, with the brethren of the 
Order, towards Salavatika, 

8. Now, as he went, Bhesika the barber walked step by step, behind 
the Exalted One. And he said to him: 

‘The following wicked opinion has occured to Lohikka the Brahman; 
“Suppose that a Samana or a Brahmana have reached up to some good 
state (of mind), then he should tell no one else about it. For what can 
one man do for another? To tell others would be like the man who, 
having broken through an old bond, should entangle himself in a new 
one. Like that, I say, is this (desire to declare to others); it is a form 
of lust”, Twere well. Sir, if the Exalted One would disabuse his mind 
thereof. For what can one man do for another?’ ‘That may well be, 
Bhesika, that may well be.’ 

9. And the Exalted One went on to the dwelling-place of Lohikka the 
Brahman, and sat down on the seat prepared for him. And Lohikka 
the Brahman satisfied the Order, with the Buddha at its head. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


224 


224 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

with his own hand, with sweet food both hard and soft, until they refused any 
more. And when the Exalted One had finished his meal, and had cleansed 
the bowl and his hands, Lohikka the Brahman brought a low seat and sat 
down beside him. And to him, thus seated the Exalted One spake as follows: 

‘Is it true what they say, Lohikka, that the following wicked opinion has 
arisen in your mind; (and he set forth the opinion as above set forth)? 

‘That is so Gotama.’ 

10. ‘Now what think you, Lohikka? Are you not etablished at Salavatika?’ 

‘Yes, that is so, Gotama.’ 

‘Then suppose, Lohikka, one were to speak thus: “Lohikka the Brahman 
has domain at Salavatika. Let him alone enjoy all the revenue, and all the 
produce of Salavatika. allowing nothing to anybody else!” Would the utterer 
of that speech be danger-maker as touching the men who live in dependance 
upon you, or not?’ 

‘He would be danger-maker, Gotama’ 

‘And making that danger, would he be a person who sympathised with 
their welfare, or not?’ 

‘He would not be considering their welfare, Gotama.’ 

‘And not considering their welfare, would his heart stand fast in love 
towards them, or in enmity?” 

‘In enmity. Gotama.’ 

‘But when one’s heart stands fast in enmity, is that unsound doctrine, 
or sound?’ 

‘It is unsound doctrine, Gotama.’ 

‘Now if a man hold unsound doctrine, Lohikka, I declare that one of two 
future births will be his lot, either purgatory or rebirth as an animal.’ 

11. ‘Now what think you Lohikka? Is not King Pasenadi of Kosala in 
possession of Kasi and Kosala?’ 

‘Yes, that is so. Gotama.’ 

‘Then suppose, Lohikka. one were to speak thus:’ King Pasenadi of Kosala 
is in possession of Kasi and Kosala. Let him enjoy all the revenue and all 
the produce of Kasi and Kosala, allowing nothing to anybody else.” Would the 
utterer of that speech be a danger-maker as touching the men who live in 
dependence on King Pasenadi of Kosala — both you yourself and others or not?’ 

‘He would be danger-maker Gotama.’ 

‘And making that danger, would he be a person who sympathised with 
their welfare, or not? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


225 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 225 

‘He would not be considering their welfare, Gotama.’ 

‘And not considering their welfare, would his heart stand fast in love 
toward them, or in enmity?’ 

‘In enmity, Gotama.’ 

‘But when one’s heart stands fast in enmity, is that unsound doctrine, 
or sound?’ 

‘It is unsound doctrine, Gotama.’ 

‘Now if a man hold unsound doctrine, Lohikka, I declare that one of 
two future births will be his lot, either purgatory or rebirth as an animal. 

12 and 14. ‘So then, Lohikka, you admit that he who should say that 
you, being in occupation of Salavatika, should therefore, yourself enjoy 
all the revenue and produce thereof, bestowing nothing on any one else; 
and he who should say that King Pasenadi of Kosala, being in power 
over Kasi and Kosala, should therefore himself enjoy all the revenue and 
produce thereof, bestowing nothing on any one else — would be making 
danger for those living in dependence upon you; or for those you and 
others living in dependence upon the King. And that those who thus 
make danger for others, must be wanting in sympathy for them. And 
that the man wanting in sympathy has his heart set fast in enmity. And 
that to have one’s heart set fast in enmity is unsound doctrine. 

13 and 15. ‘Then just so, Lohikka, he who should say: “Suppose a 
Samana or a Brahamana to have reached up to some good state (of 
mind), then should he tell no one else about it. For what can one man 
do for another? To tell others would be like the man who, having broken 
through an old bond, should entangle himself in a new one. Like that, 
I say, is this desire to declare to others, it is a form of lust;” — just so 
he, who should say, thus, would be putting obstacles in the way of 
those clansmen who, having taken upon themselves the Doctrine and 
Discipline set forth by Him-who-has-won-the-Truth, have attained to 
great distinction therein — to the fruit of conversion, for instance, or to 
the fruit of once returning, or to the fruit of never returning, or even 
to Arhatship — he would be putting obstacles in the way of those who 
are bringing to fruition the course of conduct that will lead to rebirth 
in states of bliss in heaven. But putting obstacles in their way he would 
be out of sympathy for their welfare; being out of sympathy for their 
welfare his heart would become established in enmity; and when one’s 
heart is established in enmity, that is unsound doctrine. Now if a man 
hold unsound doctrine, Lohikka, I declare that one of two future births 
will be his lot, either purgatory or rebirth as an animal. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


226 


226 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

16. ‘There are these three sorts of teachers in the world, Lohikka, 
who are worthy of blame; And whosoever should blame such a one, his 
rebuke would be justified, in accord with the facts and the truth, not 
improper. What are the three? 

‘In the first place, Lohikka, there is a sort of teacher who has not 
himself attained to that aim of Samanaship for the sake of which he 
left his home and adopted the homeless life. Without having himself 
attained to it he teaches a doctrine (Dhamma) to his hearers, saying: 
“This is good for you, this will make you happy.” Then those hearers of 
his neither listen to him, nor give ear to his words, nor become steadfast 
in heart through their knowledge thereof; they go their own way, apart 
from the teaching of the master. Such a teacher may be rebuked, setting 
out these facts, and adding: “You are like one who should make advances 
to her who keeps repulsing him, or should embrace her who turns her 
face away from him. Like that, do I say, is this lust of yours (to go on 
posing as a teacher of men, no one heeding, since, they trust you not). 
For what, then, can one man do for another ?” 

‘This, Lohikka, is the first sort of teacher in the world worthy of blame. 
And whosoever should blame such a one, his rebuke would be justified, 
in accord with the facts and the truth, not improper. 

17. ‘In the second place, Lohikka, there is a sort of teacher who has not 
himself attained to that aim of Samanship for the sake of which he left 
his home and adopted the homeless life. Without having himself attained 
to it he teaches a doctrine to his hearers, saying: “This is good for you; 
that will make you happy.” And to him his disciples listen; they give 
ears to his words; they become steadfast in heart by their understanding 
what is said; and they go not their own way, apart from the teaching 
of the master. Such a teacher may be rebuked, setting out these facts 
and adding: “You are like a man who, neglecting his own field, should 
take thought to weed out his neighbour’s field. Like that, do I say, is 
this lust of yours (to go on teaching others when you have not taught 
yourself). For what, then, can one man do for another?” 

This, Lohikka. is the second sort of teacher in the world worthy of 
blame. And whosoever should blame such a one, his rebuke would be 
justified, in accord with the facts and the truth not improper. 

18. And again, Lohikka, in the third place, there is a sort of teacher 
who has himself attained to that aim of Samanaship for the sake 
of which he left his home and adopted the homeless life. Having 
himself attained it, he teaches the doctrine to his hearers, saying: 
“This is good for you, that will make you happy.” But those hearers of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


227 


REFORMERS AND THEIR FATE 227 

his neither listen to him, nor give ear to his words, nor become steadfast in 
heart through understanding thereof; they go their own way, apart from the 
teaching of the master. Such a teacher may be rebuked, setting out these 
facts, and adding; “You are like a man who, having broken through an old 
bond, should entangle himself in a new one.” Like that, do I say, is this lust 
of yours (to go on teaching when you have not trained yourself to teach). 
For what, then, can one man do for another?” 

‘This, Lohikka, is the third sort of teacher in the world worthy of blame. 
And whosoever should blame such a one, his rebuke would be justified, in 
accord with the facts and the truth, not improper. And these, Lohikka, are 
the three sorts of teachers of which I spoke.’ 

19. ‘And when he had thus spoken, Lohikka, the Brahman spake thus to 
the Exalted One: 

‘But is there, Gotama, any sort of teacher not worthy of blame in the world?’ 

‘Yes, Lohikka, there is a teacher not worthy, in the world of blame.’ 

‘And What sort of a teacher, Gotama, is so?’ 

(The answer is in the words of the exposition set out above in the Samanna- 
phala, as follows: 

1. The appearance of a Tathagata (one who won the truth), his preaching, 
the conversion of a hearer, his adoption of the homeless state. 

2. The minor details of mere morality that he practises. 

3. The Confidence of heart he gains from this practice. 

4. The paragraph on ‘Guarded is the door of his Senses.’ 

5. The paragraph on ‘Mindful and Self-possessed.’ 

6. The paragraph on Simplicity of Life, being content with little. 

7. The paragraphs on Emancipation, ill-temper, laziness, worry and 
perplexity. 

8. The paragraph on the Joy and Peace that, as a result of this 
emancipation, fills his whole being. 

9. The paragraphs on the Four Raptures (Ghanas). 

10. The paragraphs on the Insight arising from Knowledge (the knowledge 
of the First Path). 

11. The paragraphs on the Realisation of the Four Noble Truths the 
destruction of the Intoxications — lust, delusions, be comings, and 
ignorance — and the attainment of Arhatship.) 

The refrain through and the closing paragraph is: 

‘And whosoever the teacher be, Lohikka, under whom the disciple 
attains to distinction so excellent as that, that, Lohikka is a teacher 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


228 


228 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

not open to blame in the world. And whosoever should blame such a one, 
his rebuke would be unjustifiable, not in accord either with the facts or 
with the truth, without good ground.’ 

78. And when he had thus spoken, Lohikka the Brahman said to the 
Exalted One: 

‘Just, Gotama, as if a man had caught hold of a man, falling over the 
precipitous edge of purgatory, by the hair of his head and lifted him up 
safe back on the firm land — just so have I, on the point of falling into 
purgatory, been lifted back on to the land by the Venerable Gotama. 
Most excellent, O Gotama, are the words of thy mouth, most excellent? 
Just as if a man were to set up what has been thrown down, or were to 
reveal what has been hidden away, or were to point out the right road 
to him who has gone astray, or were to bring a light into the darkness 
so that those who had eyes could see external forms — just even so has 
the truth been made known to me, in many a figure, by the Venerable 
Gotama. And I, even I, betake myself to the Venerable Gotama as my 
guide, to the Doctrine and to the Order. May the Venerable Gotama 
accept me as a disciple; as one who, from this day forth as long as life 
endures, has taken him as his guide!’ 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\vo!3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


229 


CHAPTER 9 

The Decline and Fall of 
Buddhism. 


Dr. B. R. Ambedkar had written “The Decline and Fall of 
Buddhism”, as a part of the treatise, Revolution and Counter- 
Revolution’. We have found only 5 pages in our papers which 
were not even corrected. Copy of this essay has been received 
from Shri S. S. Rege, which shows some corrections in 
Dr. Ambedkar’s handwriting. This essay is of 18 typed pages 
which is included here. — Editors, 

I 

The disappearance of Buddhism from India has been a matter of 
great surprize to everybody who cares to think about the subject 
and is also a matter of regret. But it lives in China, Japan, Burma, 
Siam, Annam, Indo-China, Ceylon and parts of Malaya-Archipalego. 
In India alone, it has ceased to exist. Not only it has ceased to live in 
India but even the name of Buddha has gone out of memory of most 
Hindus. How could such a thing have happened ? This is an important 
question for which there has been no satisfactory answer. Not only 
there is no satisfactory answer, nobody has made an attempt to arrive 
at a satisfactory answer. In dealing with this subject people fail to 
make a very important distinction. It is a distinction between the fall 
of Buddhism and the decline of Buddhism. It is necessary to make 
this distinction because the fall of Buddhism is one, the reasons for 
which are very different from those which brought about its downfall. 
For the fall is due to quite obvious causes while the reasons for its 
decline are not quite so obvious. 

There can be no doubt that the fall of Buddhism in India was due 
to the invasions of the Musalmans. Islam came out as the enemy of 
the ‘But’. The word ‘But’ as everybody knows is an Arabic word and 
means an idol. Not many people however know what the derivation 
of the word ‘But’ is ‘But’ is the Arabic corruption of Buddha. Thus 
the origin of the word indicates that in the Moslem mind idol worship 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


230 


230 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

had come to be identified with the Religion of the Buddha. To the 
Muslims, they were one and the same thing. The mission to break the 
idols thus became the mission to destroy Buddhism. Islam destroyed 
Buddhism not only in India but wherever it went. Before Islam came 
into being Buddhism was the religion of Bactria, Parthia, Afghanistan, 
Gandhar and Chinese Turkestan, as it was of the whole of Asia . 1 In all 
these countries Islam destroyed Buddhism. As Vicent Smith 2 points out : 

“The furious massacre perpetrated in many places by Musalman 
invaders were more efficacious than Orthodox Hindu persecutions, and 
had a great deal to do with the disapperance of Buddhism in several 
provinces (of India),” 

Not all will be satisfied with this explanation. It does seem inadequate. 
Islam attacked both, Bramhanism and Buddhism. It will be asked why 
should one survive and the other perish. The argument is plausible but 
not destructive of the validity of the thesis. To admit that Bramhanism 
survived, it does not mean that the fall of Buddhism was not due to 
the sword of Islam. All that it means is that, there were circumstances 
which made it possible for Bramhanism and impossible for Buddhism 
to survive the onslaught of Islam. Fortunately for Bramhanism and 
unfortunately for Buddhism that was the fact. 

Those who will pursue the matter will find that there were three special 
circumstances which made it possible for Bramhanism and impossible 
for Buddhism to survive the calamity of Muslim invasions. In the first 
place Bramhanism at the time of the Muslim invasions had the support 
of the State. Buddhism had no such support. What is however more 
important is the fact that this State support to Bramhanism lasted till 
Islam had become a quiet religion and the flames of its original fury as a 
mission against idolatory had died out. Secondly the Buddhist priesthood 
perished by the sword of Islam and could not be resusciated. On the 
other hand it was not possible for Islam to annihilate the Bramhanic 
priesthood. In the third place the Buddhist laity was persecuted by the 
Bramhanic rulers of India and to escape this tyranny the mass of the 
Buddhist population of India embraced Islam and renounced Buddhism. 

Of these circumstances there is not one which is not supported by 
history. 

Among the Provinces of India which came Under Muslim domination, 
Sind was the first. It was ruled by a Shudra king. But the throne 
was usurped by a Brahmin who established his own dynasty 

1 Modern researches go to show that Buddhism had spread over Europe and that the Cells 
in Britain were Buddhist — Sec “Buddhism in pre-Christian Britain” by Donald A. Mackenzie. 

2 Early History of India (1924) pages. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


231 


THE DECLINE AND FALL OF BUDDHISM 231 

which naturally supported the Brahmnic religion at the time of the 
invasion of Sind by Ibne Kassim in 712 A.D. The ruler of Sind was 
Dahir. This Dahir belonged to the dynasty of Brahmin rulers. 

Heuen Tsang had noticed that the Punjab was in his time ruled by a 
Kshatriya Buddhist dynasty. This dynasty ruled Punjab till about 880 A.D. 
In that year the throne was usurped by a Brahmin army commander by 
name Lalliya who founded the Brahmin Shahi dynasty. This dynasty ruled 
the Punjab from 880 A.D. to 1021 A.D. It will thus be seen that at the 
time when the invasions of the Punjab were commenced by Sabuktagin 
and Mohammad, the native rulers belonged to the Bramhanic religion 
and Jayapala (960-980 A.D.) Anandpal (980-1000 A.D.) and Trilochanpal 
(1000-21 A.D.) of whose struggles with Sabuktagin and Mahammad we 
read so much were rulers belonging to the Bramhanic faith. 

Central India began to be infested by Muslim invasions which 
commenced from the time of Mohammad and continued under the 
leadership of Shahabuddin Ghori. At that time Central India consisted 
of different kingdoms. Mewad (now known as Udepur) ruled by the 
Gulohits, Sambhar (now divided into Bundi, Kota and Sirohi) ruled by the 
Chauhans, Kanauj 1 ruled by the Pratihars, Dhar ruled by the Parmars, 
Bundelkhand ruled by Chandellas, Anhilwad ruled by the Chavdas, 
Chedi ruled by the Kalachuris. Now the rulers of all these kingdoms 
were Rajputs and the Rajputs for reasons which are mysterious and 
which I will discuss later on had become the staunchest supporters of 
the Bramhanic religion. 

‘About the time of these invasions Bengal had fallen into two kingdoms, 
Eastern and Western. West Bengal was ruled by the Kings of the Pal 
dynasty and East Bengal was ruled by the Kings of the Sena dynasty. 

The Palas were Kshatriyas. They were Buddhist but as Mr. Vadiya 
says 2 “probably only in the beginning or in name”. As to the Sena kings 
there is a difference of opinion. Dr. Bhandarkar says they were Brahmins 
who had taken to the military profession of the Kshatriyas. Mr. Vaidya 
insists that the Sena Kings were Aryan Kshatriyas or Rajputs belonging 
to the Lunar race. In any case there is no doubt that the Senas like the 
Rajputs were supporters of the orthodox faith. 3 

“South of the river Nerbudda, then existed about the time of the 
Muslim invasions four kingdoms (1) The Deccan Kingdom of Western 
Chalukyas, (2) The Southern Kingdom of the Cholas (3) The Silahara 

1 Nothing remains of Kanauj. It was completely destroyed by Mohammad although it was 
most gallantly defended by Prithviraj. 

2 History of Medieval Hindu India Vol, II. p. 142. 

3 Ibid Vol, III. Chap. x. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


232 


232 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Kingdom in Konkan on the West Coast and (4) The Ganga Kingdom of 
Trikalinga on the East Coast. These Kingdoms flourished during 1000- 
1200 A.D. which is the period of the Muslim invasions. There were 
under them, certain feudatory Kingdons which rose to power in the 12th 
Century A.D. and which became independent and powerful in the 13 
the Century. They are (1) Devagiri ruled by the Yadavas, (2) Warangal 
ruled by Kakatiyas (3) Halebid ruled by Hoyasalas (4) Madura ruled by 
the Pandyas and (5) Travancore ruled by the Cheras. 

All these ruling dynasties were followers of orthodox Brahmanism. 

The Muslim invasions of India commenced in the year 1001 A.D. 
The last wave of these invasions reached Southern India in 1296 
A.D. when Allauddin Khilji subjugated the Kingdom of Devagiri. The 
Muslim conquest of India was really not completed by 1296. The wars of 
subjugation went on between the Muslim conquerors and the local rulers 
who though defeated were not reduced. But the point which requires to 
bear in mind is that during this period of 300 years of Muslim Wars 
of conquests, India was governed all over by princes who professed the 
orthodox faith of Bramhanism. Bramhanism beaten and battered by the 
Muslim Invaders could look to the rulers for support and sustenance 
and did get it. Buddhism beaten and battered by the Muslim invaders 
had no such hope. It was an uneared for orphan and it withered in the 
cold blast of the native rulers and was consumed in the fire lit up by 
the conquerors. 

The Musalman invaders sacked the Buddhist Universities of Nalanda, 
Vikramasila, Jagaddala, Odantapuri to name only a few. They raised to 
the ground Buddhist monasteries with which the country was studded. 
The Monks fled away in thousands to Napal, Tibet and other places 
outside India. A very large number were killed outright by the Muslim 
commanders. How the Buddhist priesthood perished by the sword of the 
Muslim invaders has been recorded by the Muslim historians themselves. 
Summarizing the evidence relating to the slaughter of the Budhist Monks 
perpetrated by the Musalman General in the course of his invasion of 
Bihar in 1197 A.D. Mr. Vincent Smith says 1 : 

“The Musalman General, who had already made his name a terror 
by repeated plundering expeditions in Bihar, seized the capital 
by a daring stroke. The almost contemporary historian met one 
of the survivors of the attacking party in A.D. 1243, and learned 
from him that the Fort of Bihar was seized by a party of only two 
hundred horsemen, who boldly rushed the postern gate and gained 
possession of the place. Great quantities of plunder were obtained, 

1 Early History of India (1924) pp. 419-420. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


233 


THE DECLINE AND FALL OF BUDDHISM 233 

and the slaughter of the ‘shaven headed Brahmans’ that is to say the 
Buddhist monks, was so thoroughly completed, that when the victor 
sought for some one capable of explaining the contents of the books in 
the libraries of the monasteries, not a living man could be found who 
was able to read them. ‘It was discovered’ we are told, ‘that the whole 
of that fortress and city was a college, and in the Hindi tongue they 
call a college Bihar.” 

Such was the slaughter of the Buddhist priesthood perpetrated by the 
Islamic invaders. The axe was struck at the very root. For by killing 
the Buddhist priesthood Islam killed Buddhism. This was the greatest 
disaster that befell the religion of Buddha in India. Religion like any 
other ideololgy can be attained only by propaganda. If propoganda 
fails, religion must disappear. The priestly class, however detestable 
it may be, is necessary to the sustenance of religion. For it is by its 
propoganda that religion is kept up. Without the priestly class religion 
must disappear. The sword of Islam fell heavily upon the priestly class. 
It perished or it fled outside India. Nobody remained to keep the flame 
of Buddhism burning. 

It may be said that the same thing must have happened to the 
Brahmanic priesthood. It is possible, though not to the same extent. 
But there is this difference between the constitution of the two religions 
and the difference is so great that it contains the whole reason why 
Brahmanism survived the attack of Islam and why Buddhism did not. 
This difference relates to the constitution of the clergy. 

The Brahmnic priesthood has a most elaborate organization. A clear 
and succinct account of it has been given by the late Sir Ramkrishna 
Bhandarkar in the pages of the Indian Antiquary . 1 

‘Every Brahmanic family,’ he writes, ‘is devoted to the study of a 
particular Veda, and a particular Sakha (recension) of a Veda; and the 
domestic rites of the family are performed according to the ritual described 
in the Sutra connected with that Veda. The study consists in getting by 
heart the books forming the particular Veda. In Northern India, where 
the predominant Veda is the White Yagush and the Sakha that of the 
Madhyandinas, this study has almost died out, except at Banaras, where 
Brahmanic families from all parts of India are settled. It prevails to some 
extent in Gujarat, but to a much greater extent in the Maratha country; 
and in Tailangana there is a large number of Brahmans who still devote 
their life to this study. Numbers of these go about to all parts of the country 
in search of dakshina (fee, alms), and all well-to-do natives patronize 
them according to their means, by getting them to repeat portions of 


Indian Antiquary 1874. p. 132 quoted by Max Muller. Hibbert Lectures (1878) pp. 162-164. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


234 


234 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

their Veda, which is mostly the Black Yagush, with Apastamba for their 
Sutra. Hardly a week passes here in Bombay in which no Tailangana 
Brahman comes to me to ask for dakshina. On each occasion I get the 
men to repeat what they have learned, and compare it with the printed 
texts in my possession. 

‘With reference to their occupation, Brahmans of each Veda are 
generally divided into two daises, Grihasthas and Bhikshukas. The 
former devote themselves to a worldly avocation, while the latter spend 
their time in the study of their sacred books and the practice of their 
religious rites. 

‘Both these classes have to repeat daily the Sandhya-vandana or 
twilight-prayers, the forms of which are somewhat different for the 
different Vedas. But the repetition of the Gayatri-mantra ‘Tat Savitur 
Vareynam’ etc., five, then twenty eight, or a hundred and eight times, 
which forms the principal portion of the ceremony, is common to all. 

‘Besides this, a great many perform daily what is called Brahmayagna, 
which on certain occasions is incumbent on all. This for the Rig-Veda 
consists of the first hymn of the first mandal, and the opening sentences 
of the-Aitareya Brahmana, the five parts of the Aitereya Aranyaka, the 
Yagus-samhita, the Sama-samhita, the Atharva-samhita, Asvalayana 
Kalpa Sutra, Nirukta, Khandas, Nighantu, Jyotisha, Siksha, Panini, 
Yagnavalkya Smriti, Mahabharata, and the Sutras of Kanada, Jaimini, 
and Badarayan.’ 

The point to be remembered is that in the matter of officiation 
there is no distinction between a Bhikshuka 1 and a Grahastha. In 
Brahmanism both are priest and the Grahastha is no less entitled 
to officiate as a priest than a Bhikshu is. If a Grahastha does not 
choose to officiate as a priest, it is because he has not mastered the 
mantras and the ceremonies or because he follows some more lucrative 
vocation. Under Brahmanic dispensation every Brahmin who is not an 
outcast has the capacity to be a priest. The Bhikshuka is an actual 
priest, a Grahastha is a potential priest. All Brahmins can be recruited 
to form the army of Bramhanic priesthood. Further no particular 
training or initiation ceremony is necessary for a Brahmin to act as 
a priest. His will to officiate is enough to make him function as a 
priest. In Brahmanism the priesthood can never become extinct. Every 
Brahmin is a potential priest of Brahmanism and be drafted in service 

‘The Bhikshuks (under Bramhanism) are further sub-divided into (1) Vaidikas (2) Yajniks 
(3) Srotriyas and (4) Agnihotris. Vaidikas are those who learn the Vedas by heart and 
repeat them without a mistake. Yajnikas are those who perform Yajnas and other religious 
rites and ceremonies. Srottiyas are those who specialize in the art of performing great 
sacrifices, Agnihotris are those who maintain the three sacrificial fires and perform the Ishtis 
(fortnightly sacrifices) and Chaturmasyas (sacrifices to be performed every four months). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


235 


THE DECLINE AND FALL OF BUDDHISM 235 

when the need be. There is nothing to stop the rake’s life and progress. 
This is not possible in Buddhism. A person must be ordained in accordance 
with established rites by priests already ordained, before he can act as 
a priest. After the massacre of the Buddhist priests, ordination became 
impossible so that the priesthood almost ceased to exist. Some attempt 
was made to fill the depleted ranks of the Buddhist priests. New recruits 
for the priesthood had to be drawn from all available sources. They 
certainly were not the best. According to Haraprasad Shastri , 1 

“The paucity of Bhiksus brought about a great change in the composition 
of the Buddhist priesthood. It was the married clergy with families, 
who were called Aryas, that took the place of the Bhiksus proper, 
and began to cater to the religious needs of the Buddhists generally. 
They commenced attaining the normal status of Bhiksus through the 
performance of some sacraments. (Intro. pp. 19.7, quoting Tatakara 
Guptas’ Adikarmaracana : 149, pp. 1207-1208). They officiated at the 
religious ceremonies but at the same time, in addition to their prolusion 
of priesthood, earned their livelihood through such avocations as those 
of a mason, painter, sculptor, goldsmith, and carpenter. These artisan 
priests who were in later times larger in numbers than the Bhiksus 
proper became the religious guides of the people. Their avocations left 
them little time and desire for the acquisition of learning, for deep 
thinking, or for devotion to Dhyana and other spiritual exercises. They 
could not be expected to raise the declining Buddhism to a higher position 
through their endeavours nor could they check its course towards its 
ruin through the introduction of salutary reforms.” 

It is obvious that this new Buddhist priesthood had neither dignity 
nor learning and were a poor match for the rival, the Brahmins whose 
cunning was not unequal to their learning . 2 

The reason why Brahmanism rose from the ashes and Buddhism 
did not, is to be accounted for, not by any inherent superiority of 
Brahmanism over Buddhism. It is to be found in the peculiar character 
of their priesthood. Buddhism died because its army of priests died and 
it was not possible to create. Though beaten it was never completely 
broken. Every Brahmin alive became priest and took the place of every 
Brahmin priest who died. 

1 Summary of his views by Narendra Nath Law in Harprasad Shastri Memorial Volume 
pp. 363-64. 

2 The reason why the new Buddhist priest could not leave their avocations and devote 
themselves wholly to the propagation of religion is because as Harprasad Shastri points out. 
“The decrease in the number of Buddhist laity also resulted in the difficulty of Buddhist 
monks to receive alms. As a monk could not take alms from more than three householders 
and could not visit the same household within a month for the same purpose, ninety 
household are necessary to maintain a monk”. Harprasad Shastri Memorial Volume, p.362. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


236 


236 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

As to the conversion to the faith of Islam by the Buddhist 
population as a cause of the fall of Buddhism, there can hardly 
be much doubt. 

In his Presidential address to the early Medieval and Rajput 
section of the Indian History Congress held at Allahabad in 1938, 
Prof. Surendra Nath Sen very rightly observed that there were 
two problems relating to the Medieval History of India for which 
no satisfactory answers were forthcoming as yet. He mentiond two: 
one connected with the origin of the Rajputs and the other to the 
distribution of the Muslim population in India. Referring to the 
second, he said: 

“But I may be permitted to deal with one question that is not wholly 
of antiquarian interest today. The distribution of Muslim population 
in India demands some explanation. It is commonly believed that 
Islam followed the route of conquest and the subjugated people were 
forced to accept the faith of their rulers. The predominance of the 
Muslims in the Frontier Province and the Punjab lends some colour 
to this contention. But this theory cannot explain an overwhelming 
Muslim majority in Eastern Bengal. It is quite likely that the North- 
Western Frontier Province was peopled by Turkish folks during the 
Kushan days, and their easy conversion to Islam may be explained by 
racial affinity with the new conquerors; but the Muslims of Eastern 
Bengal are certainly not racially akin to the Turks and the Afghans, 
and the conversion of the Hindus of that region must have been due 
to other reasons .” 1 

What are these other reasons ? Prof. Sen then proceeds to lay 
bare these reasons which are found in Muslim Chronicles. He takes 
the case of Sind for which there is direct testimony and says : 2 

“According to the Chachnama, the Buddhists of Sind suffered all 
sorts of indignities and humiliations under their Brahman rulers, 
and when the Arabs invaded their country, the Buddhists lent their 
whole hearted suport to them. Later on, when Dahir was slain and 
a Muslim Government was firmly established in his country, the 
Buddhists found to their dismay that, so far as their rights and 
privileges were concerned, the Arabs were prepared to restore status 
quo ante bellum and even under the new order the Hindus received 
a preferential treatment. The only way out of this difficulty was to 
accept Islam because the converts were entitled to all the privileges 
reserved for the ruling classes. So the Buddhists of Sind joined the 
Muslim fold in large numbers.” 

Prof. Sen then adds this significant passage : 

1 Early Career of Kanhoji Angria and other papers, pp. 188-89. 

2 Ibid. pp. 188-89. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


237 


THE DECLINE AND FALL OF BUDDHISM 237 

“It cannot be an accident that the Punjab, Kashmir, the district around 
Behar Sharif, North-East Bengal where Muslims now predominate, 
were all strong Buddhist Centres in the pre-Muslim days. It will not 
be fair to suggest that the Buddhists succumbed more easily to political 
temptations than the Hindus and the change of religion was due to the 
prospects of the improvement of their political status.” 

Unfortunately the causes that have forced the Buddhist population of 
India to abandon Buddhism in favour of Islam have not been investigated 
and it is therefore impossible to say how far the persecution of the 
Brahmanic Kings was responsible for the result. But there are not wanting 
indications which suggest that this was the principal cause. We have 
positive evidence of two Kings engaged in the campaign of persecuting 
the Buddhist population. 

The first to be mentioned is Mihirkula. He belonged to the Huns who 
invaded India about 455 A.D. and established their kingdom in Northern 
India with Sakala, the modern Sialkot in the Punjab as the capital. 
Mihirkula ruled about 528 A.D. As Vincent Smith says: 1 

“All Indian traditions agree in representing Mihirkula as a blood 
thirsty tyrant. ‘The Attila of India’, stained to a more than ordinary 
degree with ‘implicable cruelty’ noted by historians as characteristic of 
the Hun temperament.” 

Mihirkula, to use the language of Smith, 2 :- “exhibited ferocious hostility 
against the peaceful Buddhist cult, and remorselessly overthrew the 
stupas and monasteries, which he plundered of their treasures”. 

The other is Sasanka, the King of Eastern India. He ruled about the 
first decade of the seventh century and was defeated in a conflict with 
Harsha. In the words of Vincent Smith 3 

“Sansanka, who has been mentioned as the treacherous murderer 
of Harsha’s brother, and probably was a scion of the Gupta dynasty, 
was a worshipper of Shiva, hating Buddhism, which he did his best to 
extirpate. He dug up and burnt the holy Bodhi tree at Buddha Gaya, 
on which, according to legend, Asoka had lavished inordinate devotion; 
broke the stone marked with the footprints of Buddha at Pataliputra; 
destroyed the convents, scattered the monks, carrying his persecutions 
to the foot of the Nepalese hills”. 

The seventh century seems to be a century of religious persecution in 
India. As Smith points out: 4 

1 Early History of India (1924) p. 336. 

2 Ibid p. 337. 

3 Ibid p. 360. 

4 Ibid F. N. p. 214. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


238 


238 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“A terrible persecution of the cognate religion Jainism occurred in 

Southern India in the seventh century”. 

Coming nearer to the time of the Muslim invasions, we have the 
instance of Sindh where presecution was undoutedly the cause. That 
these persecutions continued upto the time of the Muslim invasions may 
be presumed by the fact that in Northern India the Kings were either 
Brahmins or Rajputs both of whom were anti Buddhists. That the Jains 
were persecuted even in the 12th century is amply supported by history. 
Smith refers to Ajayadeva, a Saiva King of Gujarat who came to the 
throne in A.D. 1174-6 and began his reign by a merciless persecution 
of the Jains, torturing their leader to death. Smith adds, “Several other 
well-established instances of severe persecution might be cited.” 

There is therefore nothing to vitiate the conclusion that the fall of 
Buddhism was due to the Buddhist becoming coverts to Islam as a way of 
escaping the tyranny of Brahmanism. The evidence, if it does not support 
the conclusion, at least makes it probable. If it has been a disaster, it 
is a disaster for which Brahmanism must thank itself. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\vo!3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


239 


CHAPTER 10 

Literature of Brahminism 

We have come across scattered pages of this essay, numbering 
from 6 to 14 and 17 to 39. These pages seem to be a continuation 
of the subject dealt with under the title ‘The Decline and Fall 
of Buddhism’. Some of the pages are the first copies while the 
rest are the carbon copies. There are 14 more pages dealing with 
the Vedanta Sutras and Bhagvat Gita. The size and quality of 
the paper on which 3 chapters i.e. (1) The Decline and Fall of 
Buddhism, (2) The Literature of Brahminism and (3) Vedanta 
Sutras and Bhagvat Gita are typed, appear to be similar but 
distinct from the size and quality of other Chapters in this 
part. — Editors. 

I 

The facts which supply the reasons must be gleaned from the 
literature of Brahmanism which grew up after its political trimuph 
under Pushyamitra. 

The literature falls under six categories (1) Manu Smriti (2) Gita 
(3) Shankaracharya’s Vedant (4) Mahabharat (5) Ramayana and (6) 
the Puranas. In analysing this literature, I propose to bring out only 
such facts as are capable of being suggested by inference, the reason or 
reasons for the decline of Buddhism. 

There is nothing unusual or unfair in this. For literature is the mirror 
in which the life of a people can be said to be reflected. 

There is one point which I feel I must clear up. It relates to the 
period when this literature came into existence. Not all will agree 
that the literature referred to came into being after the revolution of 
Pushyamitra. On the contrary most Hindus, whether orthodox or not, 
learned or not, have an inerradicable belief that their sacred literature is 
a very old one in point of time. Indeed it seems to be an article of faith 
with every Hindu which necessitates a belief in a very high antiquity 
of their sacred literature. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


240 


240 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

As to the age of Manu I have given references to show that Manu 
Smriti was written by Sumati Bharagava after 185 B.C. i.e. after the 
Revolution of Pushyamitra. I need say nothing more on the subject. 

The date of the Bhagavat Gita is a subject about which there has been 
a difference of opinion. 

Mr. Telang was of opinion that the Geeta must be older than the third 
century B.C. though he was not able to say how much. 

Mr. Tilak 

In the opinion of Prof. Garbe, 1 the Geeta as we have it, is different from 
what it originally was. He agrees that the conviction that the Bhagwat 
Geeta has not reached us in its original form but has undergone essential 
transformations, is now, however, shared by many Indologists outside 
India. According to Prof. Garbe, one hundred and forty-six verses in the 
Bhagwat Geeta are new and do not belong to the original Geeta. As to 
the date of its composition Prof. Garbe says that it “cannot possibly be 
placed before the second Century A.D.” 

Prof. Kausambi insists that the Geeta was composed in the reign 
of King Baladitya. Baladitya belonged to the Gupta Dynasty which 

supplanted the Andhra Dynasty in the year Baladitya came to 

the throne in the year 467 A.D. His reasons for so late a date are two. 
Before Shankaracharya — who was born in 788 A.D. and who died in 820 
A.D. — wrote his commentary on the Bhagwat Geeta, it was an unknown 
composition. It was certainly not mentioned in the Tatvasangraha by 
Shantarakshit who wrote his treatise only 50 years before the advent of 
Shankaracharya. His second reason is this. Vasubandhu was the originator 
of a school of thought known as ‘Vijnyan Vad’. The Bramha-SutraBhashya 
contains a criticism of the Vijnyan Vad of Vasubandu. The Geeta contains 
a reference 2 to the Bramha-Sutra-Bhashya. The Geeta must therefore be 
after Vasubandu and after the Bramha-Sutra-Bhashya. Vasubandhu was 
the preceptor of the Gupta King Baladitya. That being so, the Geeta must 
have been composed during or after the reign of Baladitya. 

Nothing more need be said about the date of Shankaracharya. The 
age in which he lived and wrote is now generally accepted. Something 
about his life needs to be said. But I will reserve that for another place. 

The question of determining the date of the composition of the 
Mahabharata is next to impossible. Only an attempt to fix the period 
of its composition can be made. The Mahabharat has undergone three 
editions and with each editor the title and subject matter has changed. 
In its original form it was known as ‘Jay a’, Triumph. This original 


1 See his “Introduction to the Bhagvatgeeta” English Translation by Prof. Utgikar 

2 Geeta Adhya XIII. Shloka 4. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


241 


LITERATURE OF BRAHMINISM 241 

name occurs even in the third edition both in the beginning as well 
as in the end. The original edition of the book known as ‘Jay a’ 
was composed by one Vyas. In its second edition it was known as 
Bharat. The Editor of this second edition was one Vaishampayana. 
Vaishampayan’s edition was not the only second edition of the 
Bharata. Vyas had many pupils besides Vaishampayana; Sumantu, 
Jaimini, Paila and Shuka were his other four pupils. They all had 
learned at the feet of Vyas. Each one of them produced his own. 
Thus there were four other editions of Bharata. Vaishampayana 
recast the whole and brought out his own version. The third editor is 
Sauti. He recast Vaishampayana’s version of Bharata. Sauti’s version 
ultimately came to have the name of Mahabharata. The book has 
grown both in size and in the subject matter as well. The Jaya’ of 
Vyas was amall work having not more than 8800 Shlokas. In the 
hands of Vaishampayana it grew into 24000 verses. Sauti expanded 
it to contain 96836 Shlokas. As to subject matter the original as 
composed by Vyas was only a story of the war between the Kauravas 
and the Pandavas. In the hands of Vaishyampayana the subject 
became two-fold. To the original story there was added the sermon. 
From a purely historical work, it became a diadactic work aiming 
to teach a right code of social, moral and religious duties. Sauti the 
last Editor made it an all-embracing repository of legendary lore. 
All the smaller floating legends and historical stories which existed 
independently of the Bharata were brought together by Sauti so that 
they might not be lost or that they may be found togeher. Sauti had 
another ambition, that was to make the Bharata a storehouse of 
learning and knowledge. This is the reason why he added sections 
on all branches of knowledge, such as politics, geography, archary 
etc. Taking into account Sauti’s habit of repetition, it is no wonder 
that the Bharata in his hand became Mahabharata. 

Now as to the date of its composition. There is no doubt that the 
war between the Kauravas and the Pandavas is a very ancient 
event. But that does not mean that the composition of Vyas is as 
old as the event or contemporaneous with the event. It is difficult to 
assign specific dates to the different editions. Taking it as a whole 
Prof. Hopkins says: 1 

“The time of the whole Mahabharata generally speaking may then be 
from 200-400 A.D. This, however, takes into account neither subsequent 
additions, such as we know to have been made in later times, nor the 
various recasting in verbal form, which may safely be assumed to have 
occurred at the hands of successive copyists.” 


1 Prof Hopkins, “The Great Epic of India”, p. 389. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


242 


242 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

But there are other circumstances which definitely point to a later date. 

The Mahabharat contains a reference to the Huns. It was Skandagupta 
who fought the Huns and defeated them in or about the year 455 A.D. 
Notwithstanding this the invasions of the Huns continued till 528 A.D. 
It is obvious that the Mahabharat was being written about his time or 
therefter. 

There are other indications which suggest a much later date. The 
Mahabharat refers to the Mlenchhas or the Muslims. In the 190th Adhyaya 
of the Vana Parva of the Mahabharat there is a verse 29 wherein the 
author says that “the whole world will be Islamic. All Yadnas, rites 
and ceremonies and religious celebrations will cease”. This is a direct 
reference to the Muslims and although the verse speaks of what is to 
happen in the future, the Mahabharat being a Purana must as in the 
case of the Purana be taken to speak of the event that has happened. 
This verse so interpreted show that the Mahabharat was being written 
after the date of the Muslim invasions of India. 

There are other references which point to the same conclusion. 

In the same Adhyaya verse 59, it is said that “Oppressed by the 
Vrashalas, the Brahmins struck with fear and finding no one to protect 
them, will roam all over the world groaning and crying in agony”. 

The Vrashalas referred to in this verse cannot be the Buddhists. There 
is no particle of evidence that the Brahmins were ever oppressed. On 
the contrary the evidence is that the Brahmins, during the Buddhists 
regime, were treated with the same liberality as the Buddhist Bhikshus. 
The reference to the Vrashalas means the uncultured must be to the 
Islamic invaders. 

There occur other verses in the same Adhyaya of the Vanaparva. They 
are 65, 66 and 67. In these verses it is said that, “Society will become 
disarranged. People will worship Yedukas. They will boycott Gods. The 
Shudras will not serve the twice-born. The whole world will be covered 
with Yedukas. The Yug will come to an end.” 

What is the meaning of the term ‘Yedukas’? By some it has been 
taken to mean a Buddhist Chaitya. But according to Mr. Kausambi 1 
this is wrong. Nowhere either in the Buddhist literature or in the 
Vedic literature is the word Yeduka used in the sense of ‘Chaitya’. 
On the contrary according to the Amarkosh as commented upon by 
Maheshwar Bhatt the word Yeduka means a wall which contains 
a wooden structure to give it strength. So understood Kausambi 
contends that the word Yeduka must mean Tdgaha’ of the Musalmans 
before which they say their prayers. If this is a correct interpretation 


Hindi Sanskriti Ani Ahimsa. p. 156. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


243 


LITERATURE OF BRAHMINISM 243 

then it is obvious that parts of the Mahabharata were written after 
the invasion of Mohammad Ghori. The first Muslim invasion took place 
in 712 A.D. under Ibne Kassim. He captured some of the towns in 
Northern India but did not cause much destruction. He was followed 
by Mohammad of Gazni. He caused great destruction of Temples and 
Viharas and massacred priests of both religions. But he did not engage 
himself in building Mosques or Idgahas. That was done by Mohammad 
Ghori. From this it can be said that the writing of the Mahabharata 
was not complete till 1200 A.D. 

It seems that like the Mahabharata, the Ramayana has also gone 
through three editions. There are two sort of references to the Ramayana 
in the Mahabharata. In one case the reference is to ‘Ramayana’ without 
any mention of the author. In other the reference is to the Ramayana of 
Valmilki. But the present Ramayana is not the Ramayana of Valmiki. 1 
In the opinion of Mr. C. V. Vaidya 2 : 

“That the present Ramayana, even as it is approved and adopted by 
the searching and all-respected commentator Kataka, is not the Ramayana 
originally written by Valmiki, not even the most orthodox thinker will 
be disposed to doubt. Whoever even cursorily reads the poem cannot but 
be struck with the inconsistencies, the severances of connections, juxta- 
positions of new and old ideas which abound so greatly in the present 
Ramayana, whether we take the Bengal or the Bombay text of it. And 
one cannot but come to the conclusion that the Ramayana of Valmiki 
was substantially reconstructed at some subsequent date.” 

As in the case of the Mahabharata there has been an accretion to 
the subject matter of the Ramayana. Originally it was just a story of 
the war between Rama and Ravana over the abduction of Rama’s wife 
Sita by Ravana. In the second edition it became a story with a sermon. 
From a purely historical work it also became a didactic work aiming to 
teach a right code of Social, Moral and religious duties. When it assumed 
the form of a third edition it was, again, like the Mahabharat, made 
a repository of legends, knowledge, learning, philosophy and other arts 
and sciences. 

With regard to the date of the composition of the Ramayana one 
proposition is well established namely that the episode of Rama is 
older than the episode of the Pandus. But that the composition of 
the Ramayana has gone on paripassu along with the composition of 
the Mahabharata. Portions of Ramayana may be earlier than the 
Mahabharata. But there can be no doubt that a great part of the 

1 Hopkins “The Great Epic of India”, p. 62. 

2 The Riddle of the Ramayana Chap. II. p. 6. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


244 


244 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Ramayana was composed after a great part of the Mahabharata had 
already been composed. 1 

(INCOMPLETE) 

II 

The literature from which I propose to draw upon consists of (1) The 
Bhagwat Geeta (2) The Vedant Sutras (3) The Mahabharat (4) The 
Ramayana and (5) The Puranas. In analysing this literature I propose to 
bring out only such facts as are capable of being suggested by inference 
a reason or reasons for the decline of Buddhism. 

Before proceeding to examine the subject matter of this lirerature I 
must deal with the question of the period when this literature came into 
existence. Not all will agree that the literature referred to came into 
being after the revolution of Pushyamitra. On the contrary most Hindus 
whether orthodox or not, learned or not, have an in-eradicable belief 
that their sacred literature is a very old one in point of time. Indeed it 
seems to be an article of faith with every Hindu which necessitates a 
belief in a very high antiquity of their sacred literature. 

(I) BHAGWAT GITA 

Beginning with the Bhagwat Gita, the date of its composition has 
been a matter of controversy. Mr. Telang 2 was of opinion that we should 
“take the second century B.C. as a terminous before which the Gita must 
have been composed”. The late Mr. Tilak 3 was convinced that the date of 
the present Gita must be taken as not later than 500 years before the 
Saka era” which means that the present Gita was composed somewhere 
about.... According to Prof. Garbe 4 the date of the composition of the 
Bhagwat Gita must be placed somewhere between 200 and 400 A.D. 
There is another view propounded by Mr. Kausambi and is based on 
quite indisputable data. 

Prof. Kausambi insists that the Gita was composed in the reign 
of Gupta King Baladitya. Baladitya belonged to the Gupta dynasty 

which supplanted the Andhra Dynasty in the year Baladitya came 

to the throne in the year 467 A.D. His reasons for so late a date for 
the composition of the Gita are two. Before Sankaracharya — who was 

1 See the Appendix A to Hopkins “The Great Epic of India” for Parallel phrases in the 
two epics. 

2 Introduction to his translation of the Bhagwat Gita in the “Sacred Books, of the East” 
Series. 

3 Gita-Rahasva (Eng. Translation) Vol.II p.800. According in Mr. Tilak the original Gita 
must have been some centuries earlier. 

4 Introduction to the Bhagwat Gita English Translation by Prof. Utgikar. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


245 


LITERATURE OF BRAHMINISM 245 

born in 788 A.D. and who died in 820 A.D. — wrote his commentary on 
the Bhagwat Gita, it was an unknown composition. It was certainly 
not mentioned in the Tatvasangraha by Shantarakshit who wrote 
his treatise only 50 years before the advent of Sankaracharya. His 
second reason is this. Vasubandhu was the originator of a school 
of thought known as ‘Vijnan Vad’. The Brahma-Sutra-Bhashya 
contains a criticism of the Vijnan Vad of Vasubandhu. The Gita 
contains a reference 1 to the Brahma-Sutra-Bhashya. The Gita must 
therefore be after Vasubandhu and after the Brahma-Sutra-Bhashya. 
Vasubandhu was the preceptor of the Gupta King Baladitya. That 
being so the Bhagwat Gita must have been composed or at any 
rate portions of Gita must have been added to the original edition 
during or after the reign of Baladitya i.e. about 467 A.D. 

While there is a difference of opinion regarding the date of the 
composition of the Bhagwat Gita, there is no difference of opinion 
that the Bhagwat Gita has gone through many editions. All share 
the conviction that the Bhagwat Gita has not reached us in its 
original form but has undergone essential transformations at the 
hands of different editors who have added to it from time to time. 
It is equally clear that the editors through whose hands it has gone 
were not of equal calibre. As Prof. Garbe points out 2 

“The Gita is certainly ‘no artistic work which the all comprehending 
vision of a genious has created.’ The play of inspiration is indeed often 
times perceptible; not seldom, however, there are merely high-sounding, 
empty words with which an idea that has been already quite often 
explained, is repeated; and occasionally the literary expression is 
exceedingly faulty. Verses are bodily taken over from the Upanishad 
literature, and this is certainly what a poet filled with inspiration 
would never have done. The workings of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas 
are systematized with a truly Indian pedantry, and much indeed 
besides this could be brought forward to prove that the Gita is not 
the product of a genuinely poetic creative impulse...” 

Hopkins speaks of the Bhagwat Gita as characteristic in its sublimity 

as in its puerilities, in its logic as in its want of it Despite its 

occasional power and mystic exaltation, the Divine Song in its present 
state as a poetical production is unsatisfactory. The same thing is 
said over and over again, and the contradictions in phraseology 
and meaning are as numerous as the repetitions, so that one is not 
surprised to find it described as “the wonderful song, which causes 
the hair to stand on end”. 

1 Gita Adhayaya XIII, Shloka, 4. 

2 Ibid p. 3. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


246 


246 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

This is not to be rejected as the view of foreigners. It is fully supported 
by Prof. Rajwade 1 who goes to show that some of those who had a hand 
in the composition of the Bhagwat Gita were ignorant of the rules of 
grammar. 

While all are agreed that there have been different editions of the Gita 
under different editors, they are not agreed as to what parts of the Gita 
are original and what parts of the Gita are additions subsequently made. 
In the opinion of the late Rajaram Shastri Bhagwat the original Gita 
consisted only of 60 Shlokas. Humboldt was inclined to the view that 
originally the Gita consisted of only the first eleven Adhyayas (chapters) 
and that 12 to 18 Adhyayas were subsequent additions made to the 
original. Hopkins’ view is that the first fourteen Adhyayas constitute 
the heart of the poem. Prof. Rajwade thinks that Adhyayas 10 and 11 
are spurious. Prof. Garbe says that 146 verses in the Bhagwat Gita are 
new and do not belong to the original Gita which means that more than 
one-fifth of the Gita is new. 

Regarding the author of the Gita there is none mentioned. The Gita 
is a conversation between Arjuna and Krishna which took place on the 
battle field, in which Krishna propounds his philosophy to Arjuna. The 
conversation is reported by Sanjaya to Dhritarashtra, the father of the 
Kauravas. The Gita should have been a part of the Mahabharata, for, 
the incident which formed the occasion for it, is natural to it, but it 
does not find a place there. It is a seperate indepenent work. Yet there 
is no author to whom it is attributed. All that we know, is that Vyas 
asks Sanjaya to report to Dhritarashtra the conversation that took place 
between Arjuna and Krishna. One may therefore say that Vyas is the 
author of the Gita. 

(2) VEDANT SUTRAS 

As has already been said, the Vedic literature consists of the Vedas, the 
Brahmanas, the Aranyakas, and the Upanishadas. From the point of their 
subject matter, this literature falls into two classes (1) literature which 
deals with religious observances and rites and ceremonies technically 
called Karma Kanda and (2) literature which deals with the knowledge 
about God to use the Vedic equivalent; the Brahmanas, technically 
called ‘Gnanakanda’. The Vedas and the Brahmanas fall under the first 
category of literature, while the Aranyakas and the Upanishadas fall 
under the second. 

This Vedic literature had grown to enormous proportions and what 
is important is that, it had grown in a wild manner. Some system, 

1 Bhandarkar Memorial Volume. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


247 


LITERATURE OF BRAHMINISM 247 

some coordination was necessary to bring order out of this chaos. As a 
result of the necessity for this coordination, there grew up a branch of 
inquiry called “Mimansa” i.e. an inquiry into the connected meaning of 
sacred texts i.e. the Vedic literature. Those who thought it necessary 
to undertake such a task of systematization and coordination divided 
themselves into two schools, those who systematized the ‘Karmakand’ 
portion and these who systematized the ‘Gnanakand” portion of the 
Vedic literature. The result was that there grew up two branches of 
the Mimansa Shastra, one called Purva Mimansa and the other Uttara 
Mimansa. As the names suggest, the Purva Mimansa deals with the early 
portion of the Vedic literature namely the Vedas and the Bramhanas. 
That is why it is called Purva (early) Mimansa. The Uttara Mimansa 
deals with the later portions of the Vedic literature namely the Aranyakas 
and Upanishads. That is why it is called Uttara (later) Mimansa. 

The literature connected with the two branches of the Mimansa Shastra 
is immense. Of this, two collections of Sutras stand out as the principal 
and leading works in this field of Mimansa. The authorship of one is 
attributed to Jaimini and that of the other is ascribed to Badarayana. 
Jaimini’s Sutras deal with ‘Karmakanda’ and Badarayan’s deal with 
‘Gnanakand’. There is no doubt that there were prior to Jaimini and 
Badarayana, other authors who had written treatises on these subjects. 
Nonetheless the sutras of Jaimini and Badarayana are taken as the 
standard works on the two Branches of the Mimansa Shastra. 

Although the Sutras of both relate to that branch of inquiry called 
Mimansa, Jaimini’s sutras are called Mimansa Sutras 1 2 while those of 
Badarayana are called Vedanta Sutras. The term ‘Vedanta’ is taken to 
mean “the end of the Veda”, or the doctrines set forth in the closing 
chapter of the Vedas which comprise the Upanishads and as the 
Upanishads constitute “the final aim of the Vedas.” The Sutras of 
Badarayana which go to systematize and coordinate them have come 
to be called Vedanta Sutras, 3 * or the doctrines set forth in the closing 
chapter of the Vedas which asked Sanjaya to report to. This is the 
origin of the Vedanta Sutras. 


1 At a matter of fact the systematization of the Karmakand portion of the Vedic literature 
gave rise to two kinds of works (1) Kalpa Sutras and (2) Purva Mimansa Sutras. The 
former give only a ahort and concise description of the rituals enjoined in the Brahamanas; 
while the latter enunciate and support the general principle which the author of the Kalpa 
Sutra must follow, if he wishes to render his rules strictly conformable to the teaching 
of the Vadas. 

2 They are also called Purva Mimansa or Karma Mimansa. 

3 They also go by various other names such as Uttara Mimansa Sutras, Brahma Sutras 
or Saririka Sutras or Saririka Mimansa Sutras. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


248 


248 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Who is this Badarayana? Why did he compose these Sutras and 
when did he compose them? Beyond the name nothing is known about 
Badarayana. 1 It is not even certain that it is the real name of the author. 
There is a considerable uncertainty regarding the authorship of these 
Sutras even among his chief commentators. Some say that the author is 
Badarayana. Others say that the author of the Sutra is Vyas. The rest 
say that Badarayana and Vyas are one and the same person. Such is 
the bewildering conflict of opinion regarding the author of the Sutras. 

Why did he compose these Sutras ? That the Brahmins should undertake 
to systematize the Karmakand portion of the Vedic literature one can quite 
understand. The Brahmins were deeply concerned with the Karmakand. 
Their very existence, their livelihood depended upon the systematization 
of the Karmakand portion of the Vedic literature. The Brahmins on 
the other hand had no interest in the ‘Gnankand’ portion of the Vedic 
literature. Why should they have made an attempt to systematize it? 
The question has not even been raised. But it is an important question 
and the answer to that must also be very important. Why the question 
is important and what the answer is I shall discuss later on. 

There are two other questions with regard to the Vedanta Sutras. First 
is this. Is this work theological in character or is it purely philosophical 
in its nature? Or is it an attempt to tie down pure philosophy to the 
apron strings of established theology and thereby to make it innocuous 
and harmless. The other question relates to the commentaries on the 
Vedanta Sutras. There have been altogether five commentaries on the 
Vedanta Sutras by five eminent men all of whom are called Acharyas 
(doctors of learning) by reason of their intellectual eminence. They 
are (1) Shankaracharya (788 A.D. to 820 A.D.), (2) Ramanujacharya 
(1017 A.D. to 1137 A.D.), (3) Nimbarkacharya (died about 1162 A.D.), 
(4) Madhavacharya (1197-1276 A.D.) and (5) Vallabhacharya (born 
1417 A.D.). The commentaries of these Acharyas on the Vedanta 
Sutras have become far more important than the Vedanta Sutras. 
The point of some significance is that on the text of one and 
the same collection of the Vedanta Sutras, an attempt has been 
made by those five Acharyas to found five different systems of 
thought. According to Shankara, the Vedanta Sutras teach absolute 
monism. According to Ramanuja, qualified monism. According to 

1 The same is true of Jaimini. As Kane says “Hardly anything is known about Jaimini. 
There is a Brahmana, a Srauta Sutra and a Grihyasutra ascribed to Jaimini. But it is 
hardly likely that they are the works of the founder of the Purvamimansa. In the tarpana 
in the Asvalayan Grihya Sutra Jaimini occurs along with Sumantu, Vaishyampayana. In 
the Bhagwat Purana Jaimini is said to be the teacher of Sumantu and a promulgator 
of Samaveda. The Panchatantra tells us that an elephant crushed to death Jaimini — the 
author of the Mimansa. “A brief sketch of the Purva Mimansa System”, p. 12. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


249 


LITERATURE OF BRAHMINISM 249 

Nimbarka, monodualism. According to Madhava, dualism and according 
to Vallabha, pure monism. I will not discuss here what these terms 
mean. All I want to say is why should five different schools should have 
arisen as a result of five different interpretation of the same collection of 
Sutras. Is it a mere matter of grammar ? Or is there any other purpose 
behind these several interpretations. There is also another question 
which arises out of the plurality of commentaries. While there are Five 
different commentaries each propounding five different ways of looking 
at God and the individual soul really speaking there are only two, the 
view taken by Shankaracharya and the view taken by the other four. 
For though the four differ among themselves, they are all united in their 
opposition to Shankaracharya on two points (1) The complete oneness 
between God and individual soul and (2) the world is an illusion. Here 
comes the third question. Why did Shankaracharya propound so unique 
a view of the Vedanta Sutras of Badarayana ? Is it the result of a 
critical study of the Sutras ? Or is it a wishful interpretation designed 
to support a preconceived purpose ? 

I am only raising this question, I don’t propose to deal with them here. 
Here I am concerned with the age of this literature, is it Pre-Buddhist 
or Post-Buddhist. 

As to the date of the composition of the Vedanta Sutras the initial 
difficulty is that like the Bhagwat Gita it has also gone through several 
recensions. According to some 1 there have been three recensions of the 
Vedanta Sutras. That being so nothing definite can be said regarding the 
date of its composition. 2 The views expressed are only approximations. 
There can be no doubt that the Vedanta Sutras are composed after the 
rise of Buddhism for the Sutras do allude to Buddhism. They must not 
be after Manu for Manu refers to them in his Smriti. Prof. Keith holds 
that they must have been written about 200 A.D. and Prof. Jacobi 
believes that the Sutras must have been composed between 200 A.D. 
and 450 A.D. 

(3) MAHABHARATA 

The question of determining the date of the composition of the 
Mahabharata is next to impossible. Only an attempt to fix the period 
of its composition can be made. The Mahabharata has undergone 
three editions and with each editor the title and subject matter has 
changed. In its original form it was known as ‘Jaya’ Triumph. This 

1 See Belvalkar, Basu Mallick Lectures on Vedanta Lecture IV. 

2 See Radhakrishnan — Indian Philosophy Vol. II p. 430 where the relevant evidence is 
collected together. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


250 


250 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

original name occurs even in the third edition, both in the beginning 
as well as in the end. The original edition of the book known as 'Jay a’ 
was composed by one Vyas. In its second edition it was known as 
Bharat. The editor of this second edition was one Vaishampayana. 
Vaishampayana’s Edition was not the only second edition of the 
Bharata. Vyas had many pupils besides Vaishampayana; Sumantu, 
Jaimini, Paila and Shuka were his other four pupils. They all had 
learned at the feet of Vyas. Each one of them produced his own edition. 
Thus there were four other editions of Bharata. Vaishampayana 
recast the whole and brought out his own version. The third Editor is 
Sauti. He recast Vaishampayana’s version of Bharata. Sauti’s version 
ultimately came to have the name of Mahabharata. The book has 
grown both in size and in the subject matter as well. The ‘Jaya’ of 
Vyas was a small work having not more than 8,800 Shlokas. In the 
hands of Vaishampayana it grew into 24,000 verses. Sauti expanded 
it to contain 96,836 Shlokas. As to subject matter, the original as 
composed by Vyas was only a story of the war between the Kauravas 
and the Pandavas. In the hands of Vaishampayana the subject became 
two-fold. To the original story there was added the sermon. From a 
purely historical work it became a diadactic work aiming to teach a 
right code of social, moral and religious duties. Sauti the last Editor 
made it an all embracing repository of legendary lore. All the smaller 
floating legends and historical stories which existed independently 
of the Bharata were brought together by Sauti so that they might 
not be lost or that they may be found together. Sauti had another 
ambition, that was to make the Bharata a storehouse of learning and 
knowledge. This is the reason why he added sections on all branches 
of knowledge, such as politics, geography, archary etc. Taking into 
account Sauti’s habit of repetition it is no wonder that the Bharata 
in his hand became Mahabharata. 

Now as to the date of its composition. There is no doubt that the 
war between the Kauravas and the Pandavas is a very ancient event. 
But that does not mean that the composition of Vyas is as old as 
the event or contempraneous with the event. It is difficult to assign 
specific dates to the different editions. Taking it as a whole Prof. 
Hopkins says: 1 

“The time of the whole Mahabharata generally speaking may 
then be from 200-400 A.D. This, however, takes into account neither 
subsequent additions, such as we know, to have been made in later 
times, nor the various recasting in verbal form, which may safely be 
assumed to have occurred at the hands of successive copyists.” 


1 Prof. Hopkins, “The Great Epic of India”, p. 389. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


251 


LITERATURE OF BRAHMINISM 251 

But there are other circumstances which definitely point to a later date. 

The Mahabharata contains a reference to the Huns. It was Skandagupta 
who fought the Huns and defeated them in or about the year 455. 
Notwithstanding this, the invasions of the Huns continued till 528 A.D. 
It is obvious that the Mahabharata was being written about this time 
or thereafter. 

There are other indications pointed out by Mr. Kausambi’ which suggest 
a much later date. The Mahabharata refers to the Mlenchhas or the 
Muslims. In the 190th Adhyaya of the Vana Parva of the Mahabharata, 
there is a verse 29 wherein the author says that “the whole world will 
be Islamic. All Aryan rites and ceremonies and religious celebrations will 
cease”. This is a direct reference to the Muslims and although the verse 
speaks of what is to happen in the future, the Mahabharata being a 
Purana must as in the case of the Purana be taken to speak of the event 
has happened. This verse so interpreted show that the Mahabharata was 
being written after the date of the Muslim invasions of India. 

There are other references which point to the same conclusion. 

In the same Adhyaya verse 59 it is said that “Oppressed by the 
Vrashalas, the Brahmins struck with fear, and finding no one to protect 
them will roam all over the world-groaning and crying in agony”. 

The Vrashalas referred to in this verse cannot be the Buddhists. There 
is no particle of evidence that the Brahmins were ever oppressed. On 
the contrary the evidence is that the Brahmins during the Buddhist 
regimes were treated with the same liberality as the Buddhist Bhikshus. 
The reference to the Vrashalas which means the uncultured must be to 
the Islamic invaders. If that is so, then part of the Mahabharata was 
certainly composed after the Muslim invasions of India began. 

There occur other verses in the same Adhyaya of the Vanaparva which 
points to the same conclusion. They are 65, 66 and 67. In these verses 
it is said that “Society will become disarranged. People will worship 
Yedukas. They will boycott Gods. The Shudras will not serve the twice 
born. The whole world will be covered with Yedukas. The Yug will come 
to an end”. 

Great significance attaches to the term ‘ Yedukas ’. By some it has 
been taken to mean a Buddhist Chaitya, on the ground that Yeduka 
means bone and particularly the bones of Buddha and subsequently 
Chaitya because a Chaitya contains the bones of the Buddha. But 
according to Mr. Kausambi 2 this is wrong. Nowhere either in the 


Hindi Sanskriti Ani Ahimsa (Marathi). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


252 


252 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Buddhist literature or in the Vedic literature is the word Yeduka used 
in the sense of ‘Chaitya’. On the contrary, according to Amarkosh 
as commented upon by Maheshwar Bhatt, the word Yeduka means 
a wall which contains a wooden structure to give it strength. So 
understood Kausambi contends that the word Yeduka must mean 
‘Idgaha’ of the Musalmans before which they say their prayers. If 
this is a correct interpretation then it is obvious that part of the 
Mahabharata was written after the Muslim invasions, particularly 
after those of It Mohammad Ghori. The first Muslim invasion took 
place in 721 A.D. under Ibne Kassim. He captured some of the towns 
in Northern India but did not cause much destruction of Temples 
and Viharas and massacred priests of both the religions. But he 
did not engage himself in building Mosques or Idgahas. That was 
done by Mahammad Ghori. So that, it can well be said, that the 
writing of the Mahabharata was going on till 1200 A.D. 

RAMAYANA 

It is a fact that like Mahabharata, the Ramayana has also gone 
through three editions. There are two sorts of references to the 
Ramayana in the Mahabharata. In one case the reference is to 
Ramayana without any mention of the author. The other reference 
is to the Ramayana of Valmiki. But the present Ramayana is not 
the Ramayana of Valmiki. 1 In the opinion of Mr. C. V. Vaidya 2 : 

“That the present Ramayana, even as it is approved and adopted 
by the searching and all-respected commentator Kataka, is not the 
Ramayana originally written by Valmiki, not even the most orthodox 
thinker will be disposed to doubt. Whoever even cursorily reads the 
poem, cannot but be struck with the inconsistencies, the severances 
of connections, juxtapositions of new and old ideas which abound so 
greatly in the present Ramayana, whether we take the Bengal or the 
Bombay text of it. And one cannot but come to the conclusion that 
the Ramayana of Valmiki was substantially reconstructed at some 
subsequent date.” 

As in the case of the Mahabharata, there has been an accretion to 
the subject matter of the Ramayana. Originally it was just a story of 
the war between Rama and Ravana over the abduction of Rama’s wife 
Sita by Ravana. In the second edition it became a story with a sermon. 
From a purely historical work, it also became a didactic work aiming 
to teach a right code of Social, Moral and religious duties. When it 

1 Hopkins “The Great Epic of India”, p. 62. 

2 The Riddle of the Ramayana Chap. II. p. 6. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


253 


LITERATURE OF BRAHMINISM 253 

assumed the form of a third edition, it was again, like the Mahabharata, 
made a repository of legends, knowledge, learning, philosophy and other 
arts and sciences. 

With regard to the date of the composition of the Ramayana, one 
proposition is well established namely that the episode of Rama is older 
than the episode of the Pandus. But that the composition of the Ramayana 
has gone on peripassu along with the composition of the Mahabharata. 
Portions of Ramayana may be earlier than the Mahabharata. But there 
can be no doubt that a great part of the Ramayana was composed after 
a great part of the Mahabharata had already been composed. 1 

PURANAS 

The Puranas 2 today number 18. This is however not the original 
number. According to traditions, there is no reason to doubt, there was 
only one Purana to start with. Tradition alleges that this Purana was 
older than the Vedas. The Atharva Veda refers to this Purana and the 
Bramhanda Puran says that it is more ancient than the Vedas. It was a 
lore which the King was expected to know for the Satapada. Bramhana 
says the Adhvaryu was required to recite the Purana to the ‘King on 
the 10th day of the Yajna. 

The origin of the 18 Puranas is attributed to Vyas who it is said 
recast the original single Purana and by additions and substractions 
made 18 out of one. The making of the 18 Puranas is thus the second 
stage in the evolution of the Puranas. The edition of each of these 18 
Puranas as published or uttered by Vyas is called the Adi 3 Purana i.e. 
the original edition as brought out by Vyas. After Vyas composed these 
18 Puranas, he taught them to his disciple Romaharsana. Romaharsana 
prepared his own edition of the Puranas and taught it to his six disciples. 
Romaharsana’s edition of the Puranas thus becamethe third edition 
of the Puranas. Of the six disciples of Romaharsana, three: Kasyapa, 
Savarni and Vaisampayana, made three separate editions which may be 
called the fourth edition of the Puranas which we call by their names. 
According to the Bhavishya Purana, the Puranas came to be revised 
sometime during the reign of King Vikramaditya. 4 

1 See the Appendix A to Hopkins “The Great Epic of India” for Parallel phrases in the 
two epics. 

2 For the account of the Puranas which follows I have drawn upon Kale’s Purananirikshana 
(Marathi) and Partigar’s Ancient Indian Historical Tradition. 

3 Adi Purana does not mean a separate Purana of that name. It means the first edition 
of each of the 18 Puranas. 

4 Who is Vikramaditya ? No one can say. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


254 


254 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

As to the subject matter of the Puranas. The Purana from the oldest time 
is a recognised department of knowledge. For instance it was distinguished 
from Itihas or history. By Itihas what was understood was past occurances 
connected with a ruling king. By Akhyana was meant the recital of an event 
the occurance of which one had witnessed. By Upakhyana was meant the 
recital of something one has heard. Gathas meant songs about dead ancestors 
and about nature and universe. 

Kalpashudhi 1 are ancient ways of acting regarding Shraddha and Kalpa. 2 
The Purana was distinguished from all these branches of knowledge. 
The Purana was concerned with five subjects. (1) Sarga (2) Prati Sarga 
(3) Vamsha (4) Manvantar and (5) Vamshacharitra. Sarga means creation of 
the universe, Pratisarga means the dissolution of the Universe. Vamsha means 
Geneology, Manvantar means the Ages of the different Manus, particularly 
the fourteen successive Manus who were the progenitors or sovereigns of the 
Earth. Vamshacharitra means the account of royal dynasties. 

There has been a considerable addition made in the scope and subject 
matter of the Puranas. For the Puranas which we have are no longer 
confined to these subjects. In addition to these subjects they contain other 
subjects which fall entirely outside their prescribed scope. Indeed there has 
been such a change in the fundamental notion I regarding the scope of the 
Puranas so that some of them do not contain any treatment of the regular 
subjects but deal wholly with the new or extra subjects. The extra subjects 
include the following main topics: 

(I) Smriti Dharma which include discussion of: 

(I) Varnashrama-dharma, (2) Achara, (3) Ahnika, (4) Bhashyabhasya, 
(5) Vivaha, (6) Asaucha, (7) Shradha (8) Dravya-Suddhi (9) Pataka, 
(10) Prayaschitta, (11) Naraka, (12) Karma Vipaka and (13) Yuga 
Dharma. 

(II) Vrata Dharma — Observance of holy vows and holy days 

(III) Kshetra Dharma — Pilgrimages to holy places and 

(IV) Dana Dharma — Gifts to holy persons. 

In addition to this, there are two other topics the new subject matter with 
which one finds the Puranas to be deeply concerned. 

The first of these two topics relates to sectarian worship. The 
Puranas are votaries of a particular deity and advocate the cause of 

1 Mr. Hazara speaks of Kalpajokti (instead of Kalpashudhi) which means lore that has 
come down through ages — see chronology of Puranas p. 4. 

2 The word Kalpa is used in various senses. (1) Practicable. (2) Proper (3) Able, Competent. 
The word Kalpa is else used in various senses (1) A Sacred rule (2) A prescribed alternative 
(3) Made of performing religious rites (4) End of the world, Universal destruction. (5) A day 
of the Brahma Yuga (6) Medical treatment of the sick and (7) One of the six Vedangas: 
that which lays down the ritual and prescribes rules for ceremonies and sacrificial acts. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


255 


LITERATURE OF BRAHMINISM 255 

a particular deity and the sect devoted to his worship. Five 1 Puranas 
advocate worship of Vishnu, Eight 2 worship of Shiva, One 3 worship of 
Brahma, One 4 worship of Surya, Two worship of Devi and One worship 
of Genesh. 

The second topic which the Puranas have made a part of their subject 
matter is the history of the Avatars of the God. The Puranas make a 
distinction between identification of two Gods and the incarnation of a God. 
In the case of identification, the theory is that the God is one although 
he has two names. In the case of an incarnation, God becomes another 
being of the man or brute and does something miraculous. In reading this 
history of incarnations the fruitful source is Vishnu. For it is only Vishnu 
who has taken Avatars from time to time and done miraculous deeds and 
we find in the Puranas this new topic discussed in all its elaborate details. 

It is no wonder if by the addition of these new subjects, the Puranas 
have been transformed out of recognition. 

There is one other matter regarding the authorship of the Puranas which 
is noteworthy. It relates to the change in the authorship of the Puranas. 
Among the ancient Hindus, there were two separate sections among the 
literary class. One section consisted of the Brahmins and another section 
called Sutas who were non-Bramhins. Each was in charge of a separate 
department of literature. The Sutas had the monopoly of the Puranas. 
The Brahmins had nothing to do with the composition or the reciting of 
the Puranas. It was exclusively reserved for the Sutas and the Brahmins 
had nothing to do with it. Though the Sutas had specialized themselves in 
the making and the reciting of the Puranas, although they had acquired 
a hereditary and a prescriptive right to compose and recite the Puranas, 
there came a time when the Sutas were ousted from this profession by 
Brahmins who took it into their own hands and made a monopoly of it 
in their own favour. Thus there was a change in the authorship of the 
Puranas. Instead of the Sutas, it is the Brahmins who became their authors . 5 

It is probably when the Puranas fell into the hands of the Brahmins 
that the Puranas have been finally edited and recast to make room for 
the new subjects. The editing and recasting has been of a very daring 
character. For in doing so they have added fresh chapters, substituted 
new chapters for old chapters and written new chapters with old 
names. So that by this process some Puranas retained their earlier 


1 (1) Vishnu (2) Bhagwat (3) Narada (4) Vaman and (5) Garuda. 

2 (1) Shiva (2) Brahma (3) Linga (4) Varaha (5) Skanda (6) Matsya (7) Kurma (8) Bramhanda 

3 Padma. 

4 Agni. 

B Partiger. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


256 


256 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


materials, some lost their early materials, some gained new materials 
and some became totally new works. 

The determination of the date of the composition of the Puranas is 
a problem which has hardly been tackled.All history written by the 
Brahmins is history without dates and the Puranas are no exception. The 
date of the Puranas has to be determined by circumstantial evidence co- 
related with events the dates of which are well settled. The dates of the 
composition of the different Puranas have not been examined as closely 
as those of the other parts of the Brahminic literature. Indeed scholars 
have paid no attention to the Puranas at all certainly nothing like what 
they have done in the matter of the Vedic literature. Mr, Hazara’s is 
the only work I know of in which an attempt is made in the matter of 
determining the date of the composition of the Puranas. I give below 
the dates of the Puranas as found by him. 


Puranas 

Date of Composition 

1 . 

Markendeya 

Between 200 and 600 A. D. 

2. 

Vayu 

Between 200 and 500 A. D. 

3. 

Bramhanda 

Between 200 and 500 A. D. 

4. 

Vishnu 

Between 100 and 350 A. D. 

5. 

Matsya 

Part about 325 A. D. 
Part about 1100 A. D. 

6. 

Bhagwat 

Between 500 and 600 A. D. 

7. 

Kurma 

Between 550 and 1000 A. D. 

8. 

Vamana 

Between 700 and 1000 A. D. 

9. 

Linga 

Between 600 and 1000 A. D. 

10. 

Varaha 

Between 800 and 1500 A. D. 

11. 

Padma 

Between 600 and 950 A. D. 

12. 

Brahanaradiya 

Between 875 and 1000 A. D. 

13. 

Agni 

Between 800 and 900 A. D. 

14. 

Garuda 

Between 850 and 1000 A. D. 

15. 

Bramha 

Between 900 and 1000 A. D. 

16. 

Skanda 

.. After 700 A. D. 

17. 

Bramha Vaivrata 

.. After 700 A. D. 

18. 

Bhavishya 

.. After 500 A. D. 

No 

more precise date can 

be fixed for the Puranas at any rate for the 


present. New research in the field may narrow the higher and lower 
limits of their composition. The difference will only be a difference of 
degree. It will not be one of subversion of Eras. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


257 


LITERATURE OF BRAHMINISM 257 

This short survey is enough to remove any doubt as to the age 
of this literature that it is post-Buddhistic. The survey establishes 
one more point of great significance. This literature arose during the 
period subsequent to the triumph of Brahmins under the leadership 
of Pushyamitra. The survey brings out one other point. Vyas writes 
Mahabharata. Vyas tells Bhagwat Gita, and Vyas also writes the 
Puranas. Mahabharata contains 18 Parvas, the Gita has 18 Adhyayas 
and the Puranas number 18. Is all this an Accident ? Or is it the 
result of a design planned and worked out in concert ? We must wait 
and see. 


Ill 

THE VEDANTA SUTRAS 

The vedanta Sutras of Badarayana as has been pointed out already 
constitute a department of study on the same line as the Karma 
Sutras of Jaimini. It is natural to ask how the founders of these 
two schools of thought comfort themselves towards each other. When 
one begins to inquire into the matter one comes across facts which 
are revealing. In the first place as Prof. Belvalkar 1 points out, ‘the 
Vedanta Sutras are very closely modelled upon the Karma Sutras.’ 
In the matter of methodology and terminology, Badarayana almost 
slavishly follows Jaimini. He accepts Jaimini rules of interpreting the 
text of the Shruti. He uses Jaimin’s technical terms in the sense in 
which they have been used by Jaimini. He uses the very illustrations 
which are employed by Jaimini. 

This is a matter for small wonder. But what is not a matter for 
small wonder is the attitude of the two schools towards each other 
in the matter of doctrine. Let me give an illustration. 

Badarayana gives the following Sutras 2 as illustrative of the position 
of Jaimini towards the Vedanta. 

2. Because (the Self) is supplementary (to sacrificial acts), (the fruits 
of the knowledge of the Self) are mere praise of the agent, even as 
in other cases; thus says Jaimini. 

“According to Jaimini the Vedas merely prescribe acts to attain 
certain purposes including Liberation, and nothing more. He argues 
that the knowledge of the Self does not yield any independent 
results, as Vedanta holds, but is connected with the acts through the 
agent. No one undertakes a sacrificial act unless he is conscious of 
the fact that he is different from the body and that after death he 

1 Basu Mallick Lectures, p. 152. 

2 Swami Vireswarananda — Brahma Sutras (Advaita Ashram Edition 1936), pp. 408-411. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


258 


258 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

will go to heaven, where he will enjoy the results of his sacrifices. The 
Text dealing with Self-knowledge serve merely to enlighten the agent 
and so are subordinate to sacrificial acts. The fruits, however, which the 
Vedanta texts declare with regard to Self-knowledge, are merely praise, 
even as texts declare such results by way of praise, with respect to other 
matters. In short, Jaimini holds that by the knowledge that his Self will 
outlive the body, the agent becomes qualified for sacrificial actions, even 
as other things become fit in sacrifices through purificatory ceremonies. 

3. Because we find (from the scriptures such) conduct (of men of 
realization). 

“Janaka, emperor of Videha performed a sacrifice in which gifts were 
freely distributed” (Brih. 3.1.1.); “I am going to perform a sacrifice, Sirs” 
(Chh. 5.11.5.). Now both Janaka and Asvapati were knowers of the Self. 

If by this knowledge of the Self they had attained Liberation, there was 
no need for them to perform sacrifices. But the two texts quoted show 
that they did perform sacrifices. This proves that it is through sacrificial 
acts alone that one attains Liberation, and not through the knowledge 
of the Self, as the Vedantians hold. 

4. That (viz, that knowledge of the Self stands in a subordinate relation 
to sacrificial acts) the scriptures directly declare, 

“That alone which is performed with knowledge, faith and meditation 
becomes more powerful” (Chh. 1.1.10); This text clearly shows that 
knowledge is a part of the sacrificial act. 

5. Because the two (knowledge and work) go together (with the 
departing soul to produce the results). 

“It is followed by knowledge, work, and past experience” (Brih. 4.4.2.). 
This text shows that knowledge and work go together with the soul and 
produce the effect which it is destined to enjoy. Knowledge independently 
is not able to produce any such effect.” 

6. Because (the scriptures) enjoin (work) for such (as know the purport 
of the Vedas). 

“The scriptures enjoin work only for those who have a knowledge of 
the Vedas, which includes the knowledge of the Self. Hence knowledge 
does not independently produce any result.” 

7. And on account of prescribed rules. 

“Performing works here let a man wish to live a hundred years” 
(Is. 2.); “Agnihotra is a sacrifice lasting up to old age and death; for 
through old age one is freed from it or through death” (Sat. Br. 12.4.1.1.). 
From such prescribed rules also we find that Knowledge stands in a 
subordinate relation or work. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


259 


LITERATURE OF BRAHMINISM 259 

What is the position of Badarayana towards Jaimini and Karma 
Kanda Shastras? This is best illustrated by the reply which Badarayana 
gives to the attack by Jaimini on Vedanta as formulated by Badarayana 
in the Sutras quoted above. The reply is contained in the following 
Sutras 

8. But because (the scriptures) teach (the Supreme Self to be) other 
(than the agent), Badarayana’s (view is) correct; for that is seen (from 
the scriptures). 

“Sutras 2-7 give the view of the Mimamsakas, which is refuted by 
Sutras 8-17. 

The Vedanta texts do not teach the limited self, which is the agent, 
but the Supreme Self, which is different from the agent. Thus the 
knowledge of the Self which the Vedanta texts declare is different from 
that knowledge of the self which an agent possesses. The knowledge 
of such a Self, which is free from all limiting adjuncts, not only does 
not help, but puts an end to all actions. That the Vedanta texts teach 
the Supreme Self is clear from such texts as the following; “He who 
perceives all and knows all” (Mu. 1.1.9.); “Under the mighty rule of 
this immutable, O Gargi” etc. (Brih. 3.8.9.). 

9. But the declarations of the Shruti equally support both views. 

“This Sutra refutes the view expressed in Sutra 3. There it was shown 
that Janaka and others even after attaining Knowledge were engaged 
in work. This Sutra says the scriptural authority equally supports the 
view that for one who attained Knowledge there is no work. “Knowing 
this very Self the Brahmanas renounce the desire for sons, for wealth, 
and for the worlds, and lead a mendicant life” (Brih. 3.5.1.). “We also 
see from the scriptures that knowers of the Self like Yajnavalkya gave 
up work.” ‘This much indeed is (the means of) immortality, my dear’. 
Saying this Yajnavalkya left home” (Brih. 4.5.15). The work of Janaka 
and others was characterized by non-attachment, and as such it was 
practically no work; so the Mimamsa argument is weak. 

10. (The declaration of the scripture referred to in Sutra 4) is not 
universally true. 

The declaration of the Shruti that knowledge enhances the fruit of 
the sacrifice does not refer to all knowledge, as it is connected only 
with the Udgitha, which is the topic of the section. 

(There is) division of knowledge and work, as in the case of a hundred 
(divided between two persons). 


Swami Vireswaranand, Brahma Sutras, 411-416. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


260 


260 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“This Sutra refutes Sutra 5. “It is followed by knowledge, work, and 
past experiences” (Brih. 4.4.2.). Here we have to take knowledge and 
work in a distributive sense, meaning that knowledge follows one and 
work another. Just as when we say a hundred be given to these two 
persons, we divide it into two halves and give each man fifty. There 
is no combination of the two. Even without this explanation Sutra 5 
can be refuted. For the text quoted refers only to knowledge and work, 
which concern the transmigrating soul, and not an emancipated soul. 
For the passage,” Thus does the man who desires (transmigrate)” (Brih. 
4.4.6.) shows that the previous text refers to the transmigrating self. 
And of the emancipated soul Shruti says, “But the man who never 
desires (never transmigrates)” etc. (Brih. 4.4.6.). 

12. (The scriptures enjoin work) only on those who have read the 
Vedas. 

“This Sutra refutes Sutra 6. Those who have read the Vedas and 
known about the sacrifices are entitled to perform work. No work is 
prescribed for those who have knowledge of the Self from the Upanishads. 
Such a knowledge is incompatible with work. 

13. Because there is no special mention (of the Jaimini it does 
not(apply to him). 

“This Sutra refutes Sutra 7. The text quoted there from the Isa 
Upanishad is a general statement, and there is no special mention 
in it that it is applicable to a Jnani also. In the absence of such a 
specification it is not binding on him. 

14. Or rather the permission (to do work) is for praising (Knowledge). 

“The injunction to do work for the knowers of the Self is for the 
glorification of this Knowledge. The praise involved in it is this : 

A knower of the Self may work all his life, but on account of this 
Knowledge he will not be bound by its effects. 

15. And some according to their choice (have refrained from all 
work) . 

“In Sutra 3 it was said that Janaka and others were engaged in 
work even after Knowledge. This Sutra says that some have of their 
own accord given up all work. The point is that after Knowledge some 
may choose to work to set an example to others, while others may 
give up all work. There is no binding on the knowers of the Self as 
regards work. 

16. And (the scriptures say that the) destruction (of all qualifications 
for work results from Knowledge). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


261 


LITERATURE OF BRAHMINISM 261 

Knowledge destroys all ignorance and its products like agent, act, 
and result. “But when to the knower of Brahman everything has 
become the Self, then what should one see and through what” etc., 
(Brih. 4.5.15). The knowledge of the Self is antagonistic to all work 
and so cannot possibly be subsidiary to work. 

17. And (Knowledge belongs) to those who observe continence (i.e. 
to Sannyasis); because (this fourth Ashrama is mentioned) in the 
scriptures. 

“The scriptures declare that Knowledge is gained in that stage of life in 
which continence is prescribed, i.e. the fourth stage or Sannyasa Asrama. 

To a Sannayasin there is no work prescribed except discrimination. So 
how can Knowledge be subservient to work ? That there is a stage of 
life called Sannyasa we find from the scriputures themselves in texts 
like : “There are three branches of duty; sacrifice, study and charity 
are the first;.... All these attain to the worlds of the virtuous; but only 
one who is firmly established in Brahman attains immortality” (Chh. 
2.33.1-2); “Desiring this world (the Self) alone monks renounce their 
homes “(Brih. 4.4.22). See also Mu. 1.2.11 and Chh. 5.10.1. Everyone 
can take to this life without being a householder etc. which shows the 
independence of Knowledge”. 

Many such Sutras can be found in Badarayana indicating the 
attitude of the two schools of thought towards each other. But one 
is enough as it is so very typical. If one stops to consider the matter 
the position becomes absolutely clear. Jaimini denounces Vedanta 
as a false Shastra a snare and a delusion, something superficial, 
unnecessary and insubstantial. What does Badarayana do in the 
face of this attack ? He defends his own Vedanta Shastra. What one 
would expect from Badrayana is denunciation of the Karmakanda 
of Jaimini as a false religion. Badarayana shows no such courage. 
On the contrary he is very apologetic. He concedes that Jaimini’s 
Karmakanda is based on the Scriptures and cannot be repudiated. 
All that he insists is that his Vedanta doctrine is also true because it 
has also the support of the Scriptures. Some explanation is necessary 
for this attitude of Badarayana. 

BHAGWAT GITA 

The Bhagwat Gita forms part of the Bhishmaparvan of the great 
epic known as the Mahabharat. The epic is mainly concerned with 
the struggle for sovereignty between cousins, the Kauravas the sons 
of Dhritarashtra and the Pandavas the sons of Pandu. Pandu was the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


262 


262 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

younger brother of Dhritarashtra. But as Dhritarashtra was blind the 
throne went to Pandu. After Pandu’s death there arises a dispute between 
his sons and the sons of Dhritarashtra regarding the right of succession. 
The struggle for sovereignty culminated in the battle of Kurukshetra (near 
modern Panipat). In this battle Krishna sides with the Pandavas and 
acts as their guide, friend and philohopher, — nay acts as the charioteer 
of Arjuna, one of the Pandava brothers and who plays the part of the 
chief warrior in the battle on the side of the Pandavas. 

The two armies of the Kauravas and the Pandavas were arrayed 
for battle on the field. Arjuna in his chariot with Krishna as a driver 
comes and takes his place in front of the Pandava army. Strong and 
valiant he gazes at the opposing army of the Kauravas and is struck 
by the horror of the dreadful fratricidal war in which he will have to 
kill his cousins and slay those whom he himself revers and to whom 
he is greatly attached and indebted, He becomes dejected, lays down 
his weapons and refuses to fight. Krishna begins to argue with him 
and provoke him to fight. This argument takes the form of a question 
and answer of a conversation between Arjuna and Krishna at the end 
of which Arjuna agrees to fight. 

At the opening of the Bhagwat Gita we find old Dhritarashtra 
questioning Sanjaya about the battle. This is because Dhritarashtra the 
father of the Kauravas who though alive at the time when the battle 
was fought was a blind man and could not see and know things for 
himself. For the knowledge of the happenings he had to depend upon 
the reports of others. Anticipating the difficulty of getting someone to tell 
Dhritarashtra the authentic story, Vyas the author of the Mahabharata, 
it is said, bestowed on Sanjaya, the charioteer of Dhritrashtra, the power 
of knowing all that takes place on the battlefield — even the thoughts 
in men’s minds — that he may make a faithful report to Dhritarashtra. 
That is why we find the episode of Bhagwat Gita related as a reply 
by Sanjaya to questions by Dhritarashtra. But the Gita is really a 
conversation between Arjuna and Krishna and is rightly called Krishana 
Arjuna Samvad. 

In this Krishna-Arjuna-Samvad — which is the real name of the 
Bhagwat Gita — the main question over which there was disagreement 
was to fight or not to fight. There was no other question. This was the 
one and the only question which was the subject matter of discussion 
and argument between the two. Starting from this point of view it 
is obvious that the Gita could never have been intended by Krishna 
to be the occasion for moral instruction for the general public or the 
doctrinal exposition of any religious system or the catechism attached 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


263 


LITERATURE OF BRAHMINISM 263 

to any creed. Yet this is just what the Gita has come to be. Although the 
occasion was to decide to fight or not to fight, the Gita is said to contain 
what his religious doctrine Krishna is said to have preached to Arjuna. 

The first question that crops up is who is this Krishna. To this one gets 
quite surprizingly a variety of answers from the Gita itself. At the start 
Krishna appears as a mere man with a completely human personality. He 
is a warrior by profession. He is a great warrior though he had chosen 1 
the humble duty of driving the chariot of Arjuna. From man he grows into 
superman directing and controlling the war and its frotunes. From superman 
he grows into a demigod and dictator. When all his arguments fail to move 
Arjuna to fight, he simply orders him to fight and the frightened Arjuna 
gets up and does his biddings. From demigod he rises to the position of God 
and is spoken of as Ishwara. 

This shows the growth of the personality of Krishna. But what is important 
is that in the very same Gita, Krishna stands out as a representative of 
other forms of God. Four such representative characters in which Krishna 
appears are clear to any one who happens to read the Gita even casually. 

Krishna is Vasudeo : 

Bhagwat Gita: 

Ch.X.37. Of the Vrishnis I am Vasudeva; of the Pandavas, Dhananjaya; 
and also for the Munis, I am Vyasa; of the sages, Ushanas the sage. 

Krishna as Bhagwan : 

Ch.X.12. The Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Abode, the Supreme 
Purifier, art Thou. 

Krishna is an Avtar of Vishnu : 

Ch.X.21. Of the Adityas, I am Vishnu; of luminaries, the radiant Sun; 
of the winds, I am Marichi; of the asterisms, the Moon. 

Ch.XI.24. On seeing Thee touching the sky, shining in many a colour, 
with mouths wide open, with large fiery eyes, I am terrified at heart, 
and find no courage nor peace, O Vishnu. 

XI. 30. Swallowing all the worlds on every side with Thy flaming 
mouths. Thou art licking Thy lips. Thy fierce rays, filling the whole 
world with radiance, are burning, O Vishnu. 

Krishna is also an Avtar of Shankara ; 

X.23. And of the Rudras I am Shankara; of the Yakshas and Rakshasas 
the Lord of wealth (Kuvera); of the Vasus I am Pavaka; and of mountains, 
Meru am I. 

1 This is the result or an arrangement between him and Duryodhan leader of the Kauravas. 
Before the war actually started Duryodhan approached Krishna to fight on the side of the 
kauravas. Krishna gave him a choice, have him or have his men the Yadavas. Duryodhan 
chose the Army of Yadavas. That is why Krishna and the Yadavas fought on opposite sides. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


264 


264 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Krishna is Bramhan : — 

XV. 15. I am centered in the hearts of all; memory and perception as 
well as their loss come from Me. I am verily that which has to be known 
by all the Vedas, I indeed am the Author of the Vedanta, and the Knower 
of the Veda am I. 

XV. 16. There are two Purushas in the world, — The Perishable and the 
Imperishable. All beings are the Perishable, and the Kutastha is called 
Imperishable. 

XV. 17. But (there is) another, the Supreme Purusha, called the Highest 
Self, the immutable Lord, who pervading the three worlds, sustains them. 

XV. 18. As I transcend the Perishable and am above even the Imperishable, 
therefore am I in the world and in the Veda celebrated as the Purushottama, 
(the Highest Purusha). 

XV. 19. He who free from delusion thus knows Me, the Highest Spirit, 
he knowing all, worships Me with all his heart, O descendant of Bharata. 

Ask the next question, What is the doctrine that Krishna preaches to Arjuna ? 
The doctrine preached by Krishna to Arjuna is said to be the doctrine of 
salvation for the human soul. While the question dealt with by Krishna 
is one relating to Salvation, Krishna teaches three different doctrines of 
Salvation. 

Salvation is possible by Dnyanmarg as propounded by Samkhya Yog. 

11.39. The wisdom of Self-realisation has been declared unto thee. Hearken 
thou now to the wisdom of Yoga, endued with which, 0 son of Pritha, thou 
shah break through the bonds of Karma. 

Thus is the concluding verse of the discourse on Samkhya Yoga discussed 
in Chapter II, verses 11-16 and 18-30. 

(2) Salvation is possible by Karma marg, 

V.2. Both renunciation and performance of action lead to freedom : of 
these performance of action is superior to the renunciation of action. 

(3) Salvation is possible by Bhakti Marg. 

IX. 13. But the great souled ones O son of Pritha, possessed of the Divine 
Prakriti, knowing Me to be the origin of beings, and immutable, worship 
Me with a single mind. 

IX. 14. Glorifying Me always and striving with firm resolve, bowing 
down to Me in devotion, always steadfast, they worship Me. 

IX. 15. Others, too, sacrificing by the Yajna of knowledge (i.e. seeing the 
Self in all), worship Me the All Formed, as one, as distnct, as manifold. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


265 


LITERATURE OF BRAHMINISM 265 

IX. 17. I am the Father of this world, the Mother, the Sustainer, the 
Grandfather; the Purifier, the (one) thing to be known, (the syllable) 
Om, and also the Rik Saman and Yajus. 

IX. 22. Persons who, meditating on Me as non-separate, worship Me 
in all beings, to them thus ever jealously engaged, I carry what they 
lack and preserve what they already have. 

There are two other features of the Bhagwat Gita which arrests one’s 
attention. 

(i) There is a sentiment of depreciation of the Vedas and Vedic rituals 
and sacrifices. 

11.42-44. O Partha, no set determination is formed in the minds 
of those that are deeply attached to pleasure and power, and whose 
disctimination is stolen away by the flowery words of the unwise, who 
are full of desires and look upon heaven as their highest goal and who, 
taking pleasure in the panegyric words of the Vedas, declare that there 
is nothing else. Their (flowery) words are exuberant with various specific 
rites as the means to pleasure and power and are the causes of (new) 
births as the result of their works (performed with desire). 

11.45 The Vedas deal with the three Gunas, Be thou free, O Arjun, from 
the triad of the Gunas, free from the apirs of opposites, ever balanced, 
free from (the thought of) getting and keeping, and established in the Self. 

11.46. To the Brahmana who has known the Self, all the Vedas are 
of so much use, as a reservoir is, when there is a flood everywhere. 

IX.21. Having enjoyed the vast Swarga-world, they enter the mortal 
world, on the exhaustion of their merit; Thus, abiding by the injunctions 
of the three (Vedas), desiring desires, they (constantly) come and go. 


INCOMPLETE 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\vo!3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


266 


CHAPTER 11 

The Triumph of Brahmanism: 

Regicide or the birth of 
Counter-Revolution 

We have found only 3 typed pages under this title. Fortunately, 
a copy of the essay has been spared by Shri S. S. Rege for 
being included in this book. While examining the pages we 
have noticed that the copy given by Mr. Rege also lacks page 
nos 3 to 7 and 9 to 17. The total typed pages of this essay 
have been numbered 92 inclusive of the missing pages. The 
title on the copy of Mr. Rege is the ‘Triumph of Brahmanism’ 
; whereas the first page of the script in our papers is also 
entitled as Regicide or the Birth of Counter-Revolution’. The 
classification of the subject into IX Chapters is noted in our 
copy whereas it is missing from the copy of Mr. Rege. Both the 
titles and the classification are recorded in the handwriting 
of Dr. Ambedkar. Hence, they are retained in this print. 
Incidentaly, the page nos 9 to 17 were found tagged in other 
file. All those papers have now been introduced at proper place. 
Thus except page Nos. 4 to 7, the script is complete . — Editors. 

I 

I The Brahmanic Revolt against Buddhism. II Manu the apostle 
of Brahmanism. Ill Brahmanism and the Brahmin’s Right to rule 
and regicide. IV Brahmanism and the privileges of Brahmins. 
V Brahmanism and the Creation of Caste. VI Brahmanism and the 
degradation of the Non-Brahmins. VII Brahmanism and the Suppression 
of the Shudra. VIII Brahmanism and the Subjection of Women. 
IX Brahmanism and the legalization of the social system. 

Speaking about India, Prof. Bloomfield opens his lectures on the 
Religion of the Veda by reminding his audience that “India is the land 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


267 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 267 

of religions in more than one sense. It has produced out of its own 
resources, a number of distinctive systems and sects 

In another sense India is a land of religions. Nowhere else is the 
texture of life so much impregnated with religious convictions and 
practices... 

These observations contain profound truth. He would have given 
utterance to truth far more profound and arresting if he had said that 
India is a land of warring religions. For indeed there is no country in 
which Religion has played so great a part in its history as it has in 
the history of India. The history of India is nothing but a history of 
a mortal conflict between — Buddhism and Brahmanism. So neglected 
is this truth that no one will be found to give it his ready acceptance. 
Indeed there may not be wanting persons who would repudiate any 
such suggestion. 

Let me therefore briefly recount the salient facts of Indian history. For 
it is important that everyone who was able to understand the history 
of India must know that it is nothing but the history of the struggle 
for supremacy between Brahmanism and Buddhism. 

The history of India is said to begin with the Aryans who invaded 
India, made it their home and established their culture. Whatever may 
be the virtues of the Aryans, their culture, their religion and their 
social system, we know very little about their political history. Indeed 
notwithstanding the superiority that is claimed for the Aryans as 
against the Non-Aryans, the Aryans have left very little their political 
achievements for history to speak of. The political history of India 
begins with the rise of a non-Aryan people called Nagas, who were a 
powerful people, whom the Aryans were unable to conquer, with whom 
the Aryans had to make peace, and whom the Aryans were compelled 
to recognize as their equals. Whatever fame and glory India achieved 
in ancient times in the political field, the credit for it goes entirely to 
the Non-Aryan Nagas. It is they who made India great and glorious in 
the annals of the world. 

The first land mark in India’s political history is the emergence of 
the Kingdom of Magadha in Bihar in the year 642 B.C. The founder 
of this kingdom of Magadha is known by the name of Sisunag 1 2 and 
belonged to the non- Aryan race of Nagas. 

From the small beginning made by Sisunag, this Kingdom of 
Magadha grew in its extent under the capable rulers of this Sisunag 
dynasty. Under Bimbisara the fifth ruler of this dynasty the kingdom 

1 The Religion of the Veda p. 1. 

2 His name is also spelt as Sisunak. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


268 


268 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

grew into an Empire and came to be known as the Empire of Magadha. 
The Sisunag dynasty continued to rule the kingdom till 413 B.C. In that 
year the reigning Emperor of the Sisunag Dyansty Mahananda was killed 
by an adventurer called Nanda. Nanda usurped the throne of Magadha 
and founded the Nanda Dynasty. This Nanda Dynasty ruled over the 
Empire of Magadha upto 322 B.C. The last Nanda king was deposed 
by Chandragupta who founded the Maurya Dynasty. Chandragupta was 
related 1 to the family of the last ruling emperor of the Sisunag Dynasty 
so that it may be said that the revolution effected by Chandragupta was 
really a restoration of the Naga Empire of Magadha. 

The Mauryas by their conquests enormously extended the boundaries 
of this Empire of Magadha which they inherited. So vast became the 
growth of this Empire under Ashoka, the Empire began to be known 
by another name. It was called the Maurya Empire or the Empire of 
Ashoka. (From here onwards page Nos. 4 to 7 of the MS are missing.) 

It did not remain as one of the many diverse religions then in vogue. 
Ashoka made it the religion of the state. This of course was the greatest 
blow to Brahmanism. The Brahmins lost all state partonage and were 
neglected to a secondary and subsidiary position in the Empire of Ashoka. 
Indeed it may be said to have been suppressed for the simple reason that 
Ashoka prohibited all animal sacrifices which constituted the very essence 
of Brahmanic Religion. The Brahmins had not only lost state partonage 
but they lost their occupation which mainly consisted in performing 
sacrifices for a fee which often times was very substantial and which 
constituted their chief source of living. The Brahmins therefore lived as 
the suppressed and Depressed Classes 2 for nearly 140 years during which 
the Maurya Empire lasted. A rebellion against the Buddhist state was 
the only way of escape left to the suffering Brahmins and there is special 
reason why Pushyamitra should raise the banner of revolt against the 
rule of the Mauryas. Pushyamitra was a Sung by Gotra. The Sungas 
were Samvedi Brahmins, 3 who believed in animal sacrifices and soma 
sacrifices. The Sungas were therefore quite naturally smarting under 
the prohibition on animal sacrifices throughout the Maurya Empire 
proclaimed in the very Rock Edict by Ashoka. No wonder if Pushyamitra 
who as a Samvedi Brahmin was the first to conceive the passion to end 
the degradation of the Brahmin by destroying the Buddhist state which 

1 Mr. Hari Krishna Deb: quoted by Smith. Early History of India (1924) p.44. F.N. 1. 

2 The inferiority complex of the Brahmins under the Maurya Rule becomes apparent from 
the privileges asked for them by Manu in the Manu Smriti. This inferiority complex must 
be due to their depressed condition. 

3 See Harprasad Shastri in Buddhistic Studies (Ed. Law) Chapter XXXIV p. 819. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


269 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 269 

was the cause of it and to free them to practise their Brahmanic 
religion. 

That the object of the Regicide by Pushyamitra was to destroy 
Buddhism as a state religion and to make the Brahmins the sovereign 
rulers of India so that with the political power of the state behind it 
Brahmanism may triumph over Buddhism is borne out by two other 
circumstances. 

The first circumstance relates to the conduct of Pushyamitra himself. 
There is evidence that Pushyamitra after he ascended the throne 
performed the Ashvamedha Yajna or the horse sacrifice, the vedic rite 
which could only be performed by a paramount sovereign. As Vincent 
Smith observes : 

“The exaggerated regard for the sanctity of animal life, which was 
one of the most cherished features of Buddhism, and the motive of 
Ashoka’s most characterisitic legislation, had necessarily involved the 
prohibition of bloody sacrifices, which are essential to certain forms of 
Brahmanical worship, and were believed by the orthodox to possess the 
highest saving efficacy. The memorable horse sacrifices of Pushyamitra 
marked an early stage in the Brahmanical reaction, which was fully 
developed five centuries later in the time of Samudragupta and his 
successors.” 

Then there is evidence that Pushyamitra after his accession launched 
a violent and virulent campaign of persecution against Buddhists and 
Buddhism. 

How pitiless was the persecution of Buddhism by Pushyamitra can 
be gauged from the Proclamation which he issued against the Buddhist 
monks. By this proclamation Pushyamitra set a price of 100 gold pieces 
on the head of every Buddhist monk. 1 

Dr. Harprasad Shastri speaking about the persecution of Buddhists 
under Pushyamitra says 2 : 

“The condition of the Buddhists under the imperial sway of the 
Sungas, orthodox and bigotted, can be more easily imagined than 
described. From Chinese authorities it is known that many Buddhists 
still do not pronounce the name of Pushyamitra without a curse.” 

II 

If the Revolution of Pushyamitra was a purely political revolution 
there was no need for him to have launched a compaign of persecution 

1 Burnouf — L’Introduction a L’Historie on Buddhisme Indien (2nd. Ed.) p. 388. 

2 Buddhistic Studies (Ed. by Law) Chapter XXXIV p. 820. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


270 


270 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

against Buddhism which was not very different to the compaign of 
persecution launched by the Mahamad of Gazni against Hinduism. This 
is one piece of circumatantial evidence which proves that the aim of 
Pushyamitra was to overthrow Buddhism and establish Brahmanism 
in its place. 

Another piece of evidence which shows that the origin and purpose 
of the revolution by Pushyamitra against the Mauryas was to destroy 
Buddhism and establish Brahmanism is evidenced by the promulgation 
of Manu Smriti as a code of laws. 

The Manu Smriti is said to be divine in its origin. It is said to be 
revealed to man by Manu to whom it was revealed by the Swayambhu 
(i.e. the Creator). This claim, as will be seen from the reference already 
made to it, is set out in the Code itself. It is surprizing that nobody has 
cared to examine the grounds of such a claim. The result is that there 
is a complete failure to realise the significance, place and position of the 
Manu Smriti in the history of India. This is true even of the historians 
of India although the Manu Smriti is a record of the greatest social 
revolution that Hindu society has undergone. There can however be no 
doubt that the claim made in the Manu Smriti regarding its authorship 
is an utter fraud and the beliefs arising out of this false claim are quite 
untenable. 

The name Manu had a great prestige in the ancient history of India 
and it is with the object to invest the code with this ancient prestige 
that its authorship was attributed to Manu. That this was a fraud to 
deceive people is beyond question. The code itself is signed 1 in the family 
name of Bhrigu as was the ancient custom. “The Text Composed by 
Bhrigu (entitled) “The Dharma Code of Manu” is the real title of the 
work. The name Bhrigu is subscribed to the end of every chapter of 
the Code itself. We have therefore the family name of the author of the 
Code. His personal name is not disclosed in the Book. All the same it 
was known to many. The Author of Narada Smriti writing in about the 
4th Century A.D. knew the name of the author of the Manu Smriti and 
gives out the secret. According to Narada it was one Sumati Bhargava 
who composed the Code of Manu. Sumati Bhargava is not a legendary 
name, and must have been historical person for even Medhatithe 2 the 
great commentator on the Code of Manu held the view that this Manu 
was ‘a certain individual’. Manu therefore is the assumed name of Sumati 
Bhargava who is the real author of Manu Smriti. 

1 On this point see Jaiswal’s Volume on Manu & Yajnavalkya. 

2 Commentary on Manu 1.1. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


271 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 271 

When did this Sumati Bhargava compose this Code? It is not possible 
to give any precise date for its composition. But quite a precise period 
during which it was composed can be given. According to scholars whose 
authority cannot be questioned Sumati Bhargava must have composed 
the Code which he deliberately called Munu Smriti between 170 B.C. 
and 150 B.C. Now if one bears in mind the fact that the Brahmanic 
Revolution by Pushyamitra took place in 185 B.C. there remains no doubt 
that the code known as Manu Smriti was promulgated by Pushyamitra as 
embodying the principles of Brahmanic Revolution against the Buddhist 
state of the Mauryas. That the Manu Smriti forms the Institutes of 
Brahmanism and are a proof that Pushyamitra Revolution was not a 
purely personal adventure will be clear to any one who cares to note 
the following peculiarities relating to the Manu Smriti. 

First thing to be noted is that the Manu Smriti is a new Code of 
law promulgated for the first time during the reign of Pushyamitra. 
There was a view once prevalent that there existed a code known as 
the Manava-Dharma-Sutra and that what is known as Manu Smriti is 
an adaptation of the old Manava Dharma Sutra. This view has been 
abandoned as there has been no trace of any such work. Two other 
works existed prior to the present Manu Smriti. One was known as 
Manava Artha Sastra, or Manava-Raja-Sastra or Manava-Raja-Dharma- 
Sastra. The other work was known as Manava-Grihya-Sutra. Scholars 
have compared the Manu Smriti. On important points the provisions 
of one are not only dissimilar but are in every way contrary to the 
provisions contained in the other. This is enough to show that Manu 
Smriti contains the new law of the new regime. 

That the new regime of Pushyamitra was anti-Buddhist is betrayed by 
the open provisions enacted in the Manu Smriti against the Buddhists 
and Buddhism. Note the following provisions in Manu Smriti: — 

IX. 225. “... Men who abide in heresy ... the king should banish from 
his realm.” 

IX. 226. “These robbers in disguise, living in the king’s realm constantly 
injure the worthy subject by the performance of their misdeeds.” 

V. 89. “Libations of water shall not be offered to (the souls of) those 
who (neglect the prescribed rites and may be said to) have been born in 
vain, to those born in consequence of an illegal mixture of the castes, 
to those who are ascetics (of heretical sects) and to those who have 
committed suicide.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


272 


272 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

V. 90. (Libations of water shall not be offered to the souls of) women 
who have joined a heretical sect 

IV. 30. Let him (the householder) not honour, even by a greeting 
heretics.... logicians, (arguing against the Veda). 

XII. 95. “All those traditions and all those despicable systems of 
Philosophy, which are not based on the Veda produce no reward after 
death, for they are declared to be founded on Darkness. 

XII. 96. “All those (doctrines), differing from the (Veda), which spring 
up and (soon) perish, are worthless and false, because of modern date.” 

Who are the heretics to whom Manu refers and whom he wants the 
new king to banish from his realm and the Householder not to honour in 
life as well as after death? What is this worthless philosophy of modern 
date, differing from the Vedas, based on darkness and bound to perish? 
There can be no doubt that the heretic of Manu is the Buddhist and 
the worthless philosophy of modern date differing from the Vedas is 
Buddhism. Kalluck Bhutt another commentator on Manu Smriti expressly 
states that the references to heretics in these Shlokas in Manu are to 
the Buddhists and Buddhism. 

The third circumstance is the position assigned to the Brahmins in 
the Manu Smriti. Note the following provisions in Manu : — 

I. 93. As the Brahmana sprang from (Bramha’s) mouth, as he was 
the first born, and as he possesses the Veda, he is by right the lord of 
this whole creation. 

I. 96. Of created beings the most excellent are said to be those which 
are animated; of the animated, those which subsist by intelligence; of 
the intelligent, mankind; and of men, the Brahmans. 

I. 100. Whatever exists in the world is the property of the Bramhans; 
on account of the excellence of his origin the Brahmana is, indeed, 
entitled to it all. 

I. 101. The Brahmana eats but his own food, wears but his own 
apparel, bestows but his own in alms; other mortals subsist through 
the benevolence of the Brahmana. 

X. 3. On account of his pre-eminance, on account of the superiority of 
his origin, on account of his observance of (particular)restrictive rules, 
and on account of his particular sanctification, the Brahmana is the 
lord of (all) castes. 

XI. 35. The Bramhana is declared to be the creator of the world, the 
punisher, the teacher, and hence a benefactor of all created beings; to 
him let no man say anything unpropitious, nor use any harsh words. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


273 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 273 

Manu warns the King against displeasing the Bramhans in the 
following terms : — 

IX. 313. Let him (the King) not, though fallen unto the deepest distress, 
provoke Bramhans to anger; for they, when angered, could instantly 
destroy him together with his army and his vehicles. 

Manu further proclaims, 

XI. 31. A Bramhana who knows the law need not bring any (offence) 
to the notice of the king; by his own power alone he can punish those 
men who injure him. 

XI. 32. His own power is greater than the power of the king; 

The Bramhana, therefore, may punish his foes by his own power alone. 

This deification of the Brahmins, placing them even above the King 
would have been impossible unless the King himself was a Brahmin 
and in sympathy with the view expressed by Manu. Pushyamitra and 
his successors could not have tolerated these exaggerated claims of 
the Brahmins unless they themselves were Brahmins interested in the 
establishment of Bramhanism. Indeed it is quite possible that the Manu 
Smriti was composed at the command of Pushyamitra himself and forms 
the book of the philosophy of Bramhanism. 

Taking all these facts into considerations there can remain no doubt; 
the one and only object of Pushyamitra’s revolution was to destroy 
Buddhism and re-establish Bramhanism. 

The foregoing summary of the political history of India would have 
been quite unnecessary for the immediate purpose of this chapter if 
I was satisfied with the way in which the history of India is written. 
But frankly I am not satisfied. For too much emphasis is laid on the 
Muslim conquest of India. Reels and reels have been written to show 
how wave after wave of Muslim invasions came down like avalanche 
and enveloped the people and overthrew their rulers. The whole history 
of India is made to appear as though the only important thing in it is 
a catalogue of Muslim invasions. But even from this narrow point of 
view it is clear that the Muslim invasions are not the only invasions 
worth study. There have been other invasions equally if not of greater 
importance. If Hindu India was invaded by the Muslim invaders so 
was Buddhist India invaded by Bramhanic invaders. The Muslim 
invasions of Hindu India and the Bramhanic invasions of Buddhist 
India have many similarities. The Musalman invaders of Hindu India 
fought among themselves for their dynastic ambitions. The Arabs, 
Turks, Mongols and Afghans fought for supremacy among themselves. 
But they had one thing in common — namely the mission to destroy 
idolatory. Similarly the Bramhanic invadars of Buddhist India fought 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


274 


274 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

among themselves for their dynastic ambitions. The Sungas, Kanvas and 
the Andhras fought for supremacy among themselves. But they, like the 
Muslim invaders of Hindu India, had one object in common that was to 
destroy Buddhism and the Buddhist Empire of the Mauryas. Surely if 
Muslim invasions of Hindu India are worthy of study at the hands of 
the historians, the invasions of Buddhist India by Bramhanic invaders 
are equally deserving of study. The ways and methods employed by 
the Bramhanic invaders of Buddhist India to suppress Buddhism were 
not less violent and less virulent than the ways and means adopted 
by Muslim invaders to suppress Hinduism. From the point of view 
of the permanent effect on the social and spiritual life of the people, 
the Bramhanic invasions of Buddhist India have been so profound in 
their effect that compared to them, the effect of Muslim invasions on 
Hindu India have been really superficial and ephemeral. The Muslim 
invaders destroyed only the outward symbols of Hindu religion such as 
temples and Maths etc. They did not extirpate Hinduism nor did they 
cause any subversion of the principles or doctrines which governed the 
spiritual life of the people. The effects of the Bramhanic invasions were 
a thorough-going change in the principles which Buddhism had preached 
for a century as true and eternal principles of spiritual life and which 
had been accepted and followed by the masses as the way of life. To 
alter the metaphor the Muslim invaders only stirred the waters in the 
bath and that too only for a while. Thereafter they got tired of stirring 
and left the waters with the sediments to settle. They never threw the 
baby — if one can speak of the principles of Hinduism as a baby — out 
of the bath. Bramhanism in its conflict with Buddhism made a clean 
sweep. It emptied the bath with the Buddhist Baby in it and filled the 
bath with its own waters and placed in it its own baby. Bramhanism 
did not care to stop how filthy and dirty was its water as compared 
with the clean and fragrant water which flowed from the noble source 
of Buddhism. Bramhanism did not care to stop how hideous and ugly 
was its own baby as compared with the Buddhist baby. Bramhanism 
acquired by its invasions political power to annihilate Buddhism and 
it did annihilate Buddhism. Islam did not supplant Hinduism. Islam 
never made a thorough job of its mission. Bramhanism did. It drove out 
Buddhism as a religion and occupied its place. 

These facts show that Brahmanic invasions of Buddhist India have 
a far greater significance to the Historian of India than the Muslim 
invasions of Hindu India can be said to have produced. Yet very little 
space is devoted by historians to the vissicitudes which befell Buddhist 
India built up by the Mauryas and even where that is done they have 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


275 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 275 

not cared to deal in a pointed manner with questions that quite naturally 
arise: questions such as, who were the Sungas, Kanavas and Andhras; 
why did they destroy the Buddhist India which was built up by the 
Mauryas, nor has any attempt been made to study the changes that 
Brahmanism after its triumph over Buddhism brought about in the 
political and social structure. 

Failure to appreciate this aspect of India’s history is due to the 
prevalence of some very wrong notions. It has been commonly supposed 
that the culture of India has been one and the same all throughout history; 
that Brahmanism, Buddhism, Jainism are simply different phases and 
that there has never been any fundamental antagonism between them. 
Secondly it has been assumed that whatever conflicts have taken place 
in Indian politics were purely political and dynastic and that they had 
no social and spiritual significance. It is because of these wrong notions 
that Indian history has become a purely mechanical thing, a record of 
one dynasty succeeding another and one ruler succeeding another ruler. 
A corrective to such an attitude and to such a method of writing history 
lies in recognition of two facts which are indisputable. 

In the first place it must be recognized that there has never been 
such as a common Indian culture, that historically there have been 
three Indias, Brahmanic India, Buddhist India and Hindu India, each 
with its own culture. Secondly it must be recognized that the history 
of India before the Muslim invasions is the history of a mortal conflict 
between Bramhanism and Buddhism. Any one who does not recognize 
these two facts will never be able to write a true history of India, a 
history which will disclose the meaning and purpose running through 
it. It is a corrective to Indian history written as it is and to disclose 
the meaning and purposes running through it that I was obliged to re- 
cast the history of the Brahmanic invasions of Buddhist India and the 
political triumph of Brahmanism over Buddhism. 

We must therefore begin with the recognition of the fact: Pushyamitra’s 
revolution was a political revolution engineered by the Brahmins to 
overthrow Buddhism. 

The curious will naturally ask what did this triumphant Brahmanism 
do? It is to this question that I will now turn. The deeds or misdeeds 
of this triumphant Brahmanism may be catalogued under seven heads. 

(1) It established the right of the Brahmin to rule and commit regicide. 

(2) It made the Bramhins a class of privileged persons. (3) It converted 
the Varna into caste. (4) It brought about a conflict and anti-social 
feeling between the different castes. (5) It degraded the Shudras and 
the women (6) It forged the system of graded inequality and (7) It made 
legal and rigid the social system which was conventional and flexible. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


276 


276 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

To begin with the first. 

The revolution brought about by Pushyamitra created an initial difficulty 
in the way of the Brahmins. People could not be easily reconciled to this 
revolution. The resentment of the public was well expressed by the poet Bana 1 
when in referring to this revolution reviles Pushyamitra as being base born 
and calls his act of regicide as Anarya. The act of Pushyamitra was properly 
described by Bana as Anarya i.e. contrary to Aryan law. For on three points 
the Aryan law at the date of Pushyamitra’s revolution was well settled. The 
then Aryan law declared (1) That Kingship is the right of the Kshatriya. only. 
A Brahmin could never be a king. (2) That no Brahmin shall take to the 
profession of Arms 2 and (3) That rebellion against the King’s authority was 
a sin. Pushyamitra in fostering the rebellion had committed a crime against 
each of these three laws. He was Brahmin, and although a Brahmin he 
rebelled against the King, took to the profession of Arms and became a King. 
People were not reconciled to this usurption which constituted so flagrant a 
breach of the law that the Brahmins had to regularize the position created 
by Pushyamitra. This the Brahmins did by taking the bold step of changing 
the law. This change of law is quite manifest from the Manu Smriti. I will 
quote the appropriate shlokas from the Code: 

XII. 100. “The post of the Commander-in-Chief of the Kingdom, the very 
Headship of Government, the complete empire over every one are deserved 
by the Brahmin.” 

Here we have one change in the law. This new law declares that the 
Brahmin has a right to become Senapati (Commander of forces), to conquer 
a kingdom, and to be the ruler and the Emperor of it. 

XI. 31. A Brahmin, who well knows the laws, need not complain to the 
king of any grievous injury; since, even by his own power, he may chastise 
those, who injure him. 

XI. 32. His (Brahmin’s) own power, which depends on himself alone is 
mightier than the royal power, which depends on other men; by his own 
might, therefore may a Brahmin coerce his foes. 

1 Harsha Charita, quoted by Smith (1924) p. 208. 

2 The rule was so strict that according to the Apastamba Dharmasutra ‘A Brahman shall 
not take up a weapon in his hand though he be only desirous of examining it.’ It may be 
matter of some surprize how Pushyamitra who was a Brahmans could have done a deed 
which could under the circumstances be expected only from a member of the martial race. 
This difficulty is well explained by Harprasad Shastri. According to him the Sungas though 
Brahmins were a martial race. Among the fighting Brahmans, two were distinguished 
among the rest, the Vishwamitras and the Bharadvajas. The wife of Vishvamitra Brahmin 
proving barren, a Bharadvaj was requested by the ancient custom of ‘Niyoga’ to beget a 
son on Vishvamitra’s. The issue was Sung. He was the progenitor of a Gotra and that 
Gotra took up the Samveda for their study. The Sungas were called a Dvayamushyam 
gotra i.e. a gotra issuing from the two gotras, Vishvamitra and Bharadvaj both of which 
had taken to military occupation — See Buddhistic Studies (Ed. by Law) Ch. XXXIV, p. 820. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


277 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 277 

XI. 261-62. A Brahmin who has killed even the peoples of the three 
worlds, is completely freed from all sins on reciting three times the Rig, 
Yajur or Sama.-Veda with the Upanishadas.” 

Here is the second change in the law. It authorized the Brahmin to 
kill not only the king but to engage in a general massacre of men if 
they seek to do injury to his power and position. 

VIII. 348. “The twice born man may take arms, when the rightful 
occupation assigned to each by Dharma is obstructed by force; and when, 
in some evil time, a disaster has befallen the twice-born classes.” 

IX. 320. Of a Kshatriya (Military man or king), who raise his arm 
violently on all occasions against the Brahmins, Brahmin himself shall be 
the chastiser; since the soldier originally proceeded from the Brahmin.” 

This is the third legal change. It recognized the right to rebellion and 
the right to regicide. The new law is very delicately framed. It gives 
the right of rebellion to three higher classes. But it is also given to the 
Brahmins singly by way of providing for a situation when the Kshatriyas 
and the Vaishyas may not be prepared to join the Brahmin in bringing 
about a rebellion. The right of rebellion is well circumscribed. It can 
be exercised only when the king is guilty of upsetting the occupations 
assigned by Manu to the different Varnas. 

These legal changes were as necessary as they were revolutionary. Their 
object was to legalize and regularize the position created by Pushyamitra 
by killing the last Maurya King. By virtue of these legal changes, a 
Brahmin could lawfully become a king, could lawfully take arms, could 
lawfully depose or murder a king who was opposed to Chaturvarna and 
could lawfully kill any subject that opposed the authority of the Brahmin. 
Manu gave the Brahmins a right to commit Barthalomeu if it became 
necessary to safeguard their interests. 

In this way Brahmanism established the right of Brahmana to rule 
and set at rest whatever doubt and dispute there was regarding the 
same. But that could hardly be enough for the Brahmins as a whole. 
It may be a matter of pride but not of any advantage. There can be no 
special virtue in Brahmin rule if the Brahmin was treated as common 
man along with the Non-Brahmins having the same rights and same 
duties. Brahmin rule if it is to justify itself, it must do so by conferring 
special privileges and immunities on the Brahmins as a class. Indeed 
Pushyamitra’s Revolution would have been an ill wind blowing no 
good if it had not recognized the superior position of the Brahmins 
and conferred upon them special advantages. Manu was alive to this 
and accordingly proceeds to create monopolies for Brahmins and grant 
them certain immunities and privileges as may be seen from the Code. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


278 


278 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

First as to monopolies: 

I. 88. To Brahmanas he assigned teaching and studying (the Veda) 
sacrificing for their own benefit and for others, giving and accepting 
(of alms). 

X. 1. Let the three twice-born castes (Varna), discharging their 
(prescribed) duties, study (the Veda); but among them the Brahmana 
(alone) shall teach it, not the other two; that is an established rule. 

X. 2. The Brahmana must know the means of subsistence (prescribed) 
by law for all, instruct others, and himself live according to (the law). 

X. 3. On account of his pre-eminence, on account of the superiority of 
his origin, on account of his observance of (particular) restrictive rules, 
and on account of his particular sanctification, the Brahmana is the 
lord of (all) castes (varna). 

X. 74. Brahmanas who are intent on the means (of gaining union 
with) Brahman and firm in (discharging) their duties, shall live by 
duly performing the following six acts, (which are enumerated) in their 
(proper) order. 

X. 75. Teaching, studying, sacrificing for himself, sacrificing for 
others, making gifts and receiving them are the six acts (prescribed) 
for a Brahamana. 

X. 76. But among the six acts (ordained) for him three are his means 
of subsistence, (viz.) sacrificing for others, teaching, and accepting gifts 
from pure mdn. 

X. 77. (Passing) from the Brahmana to the Kshatriya, three acts 
(incumbent) (on the former) are forbidden, (viz.) teaching, sacrificing 
for others, and, thirdly, the acceptance of gifts. 

X. 78. The same are likewise forbidden to a Vaisya, that is a settled 
rule; for Manu, the lord of creatures (Prajapati), has not prescribed them 
for (men of) those two (castes). 

X. 79. To carry arms for striking and for throwing (is prescribed) 
for Kshatriyas as a means of subsistence; to trade, (to rear) cattle, and 
agriculture for Vaisyas; but their duties are liberality, the study of the 
Veda, and the performance of sacrifices. 

Here are three things which Manu made the monopoly of the Brahmin: 
teaching Vedas, performing Sacrifices and receiving gifts. 

The following are the immunities that were granted to the Brahmins. 
They fall into two classes; freedom from taxation and exemption from 
certain forms of punishment for crimes. 

VII. 133. Though dying (with want), a king must not levy a tax on 
Srotriyas, and no Srotriya residing in his kingdom, must perish from 
hunger. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


279 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 279 

VIII. 122. They declare that the wise have prescribed these fines for 
perjury, in order to prevent a failure of justice, and in order to restrain 
injustice. 

VIII. 123. But a just king shall fine and banish (men of) the three 
(lower) castes (varna) who have given false evidence, but a Brahmana 
he shall (only) banish. 

VIII. 124. Manu, the son of the Self-existent (Svayambhu), has named 
ten places on which punishment may be (made to fall) in the cases of 
the three (lower) castes (varna); but a Brahmana shall depart unhurt 
(from the country). 

VIII. 379. Tonsure (of the head) is ordained for a Brahmana (instead 
of) capital punishment; but (men of) other castes shall suffer capital 
punishment. 

VIII. 380. Let him never slay a Brahmana, though he have committed 
all (possible) crimes; let him banish such an (offender), leaving all his 
property (to him) and (his body) unhurt. 

Thus Manu places the Brahmin above the ordinary penal law for 
felony. He is to be allowed to leave the country withdraw a wound on 
him and with all property in proved offences of capital punishment. He 
is not to suffer forfeiture of fine nor capital punishment. He suffered 
only banishment which in the words of Hobbes was only a “Change of 
air” after having committed the most heinous crimes. 

Manu gave him also certain privileges. 

A Judge must be a Brahmin. 

VIII. 9. But if the king does not personally investigate the suits, then 
let him appoint a learned Brahmana to try them. 

VIII. 10. That (man) shall enter that most excellent court, accompanied 
by three assessors, and fully consider (all) causes (brought) before the 
(king), either sitting down or standing. The other privileges were financial. 

VIII. 37. When a learned Brahmana has found treasure, deposited 
in former (times), he may take even the whole (of it); for he is master 
of everything. 

VIII. 38. When the king finds treasure of old concealed in the ground, 
let him give one half to Brahmanas and place the (other)half in his 
treasury. 

IX. 323. But (a king who feels his end drawing nigh) shall bestow 
all his wealth, accumulated from fines, on Brahmanas, make over his 
kingdom to his son, and then seek death in battle. 

IX. 187. Always to that (relative within three degrees) who is nearest 
to the (deceased) Sapinda the estate shall belong; afterwards a Sakulya 
shall be (the heir, then) the spiritual teacher or the pupil. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


280 


280 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

IX. 188. But on failure of all (heirs) Brahmanas (shall) share the 
estate, (who are) versed in the three Vedas, pure and self-controlled ; 
thus the law is not violated. 

IX. 189. The property of a Brahmana must never be taken by the 
King, that is a settled rule; but (the property of men) of other castes 
the king may take on failure of all (heirs). 

These are some of the advantages, immunities and privileges which 
Manu conferred upon the Brahmins. This was a token of a Brahmin 
having become a king. 

Supporters of Brahmanism — so strong is the belief in the excellence of 
Brahmanism that there are no appologists for it as yet — never fail to point 
to the disabilities which Manu has imposed upon the Brahmins. Their 
object in doing so is to show that the ideal placed by Manu before the 
Brahmin is poverty and service. That Manu has placed certain disabilities 
upon the Brahmins is a fact. But to conclude from it that Manu’s ideal 
for a Brahmin is poverty and service is a gross and deliberate concoction 
for which there is no foundation in Manu. 

To understand the real purpose which Manu had in imposing these 
disabilities, two things must be borne in mind. Firstly the place Manu 
has assigned to the Brahmins in the general scheme of society and 
secondly the nature of the disabilities. The place assigned by Manu to 
the Brahmins is enunciated by him in unequivocal terms. The matter 
being important I must quote again the Verses already quoted. 

I. 93. As the Brahmana sprang from (Brahman’s) mouth, as he was 
the first born, and as he possesses the Veda, he is by right the lord of 
this whole creation. 

Consider the nature of the disabilities. 

IV. 2. A Brahamana must seek a means of subsistence which either 
causes no, or at least little pain (to others), and live (by that) except 
in times of distress. 

IV. 3. For the purpose of gaining bare subsistence, let him accumulate 
property by (following those) irreproachable occupations (which are 
prescribed for) his (caste), without (unduly) fatiguing his body. 

VIII. 337. In (a case of) theft the guilt of a Sudra shall be eightfold, 
that of a Vaishya sixteenfold, that of a Kshatriya two-and-thirty fold. 

VIII. 338. That of a Brahamana sixty-four-fold, or quite a hundred-fold 
or (even) twice four- and- sixty-fold; (each of them) knowing the nature 
of the offence. 

VIII. 383. A Brahamana shall be compelled to pay a fine of one 
thousand (panas) if he has intercourse with guarded (females of) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


281 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 281 

those two (castes); for (offending with) a (guarded) Sudra female a fine 
of one thousand (panas) (shall be inflicted) on a Kshatriya or a Vaishya. 

VIII. 384. For (intercourse with) an unguarded Kshatriya a fine of 
five hundred (panas shall fall) on a Vaisya; but (for the same offence) 
a Kshatriya shall be shaved with the urine (of a donkey) or (pay) the 
same fine. 

VIII. 385. A Brahamana who approaches unguarded females (of the) 
Kshatriya or Vaisya (castes), or a Sudra female, shall be fined five 
hundred (panas); but (for intercourse with) a female (of the) lowest 
(castes), one thousand. 

Examining these disabilities against the background furnished by the 
place assigned to him by Manu, it is obvious that the object of these 
disabilities was not to make the Brahmin suffer. On the other hand it 
becomes clear that the object of Manu was to save the Brahmin from 
falling from the high pennacle on which he had placed him and incurring 
the disgrace of the non-Brahmins. 

That the object of Manu was not to subject the Brahmins to poverty 
and destitute is clear from other provisions from Manu-Smriti. In this 
connection reference should be made to the rule contained in the Manu 
Smriti regarding the course of conduct a Brahmin should pursue when 
he is in distres. 

X. 80. Among the several occupations the most commendable are, 
teaching the Veda for a Brahmana, protecting (the people) for a Kshatriya, 
and trade for a Vaisya. 

X. 81. But a Brahmana, unable to subsist by his peculiar occupations 
just mentioned, may live according to the law applicable to Kshatriyas; 
for the latter is next to him in rank. 

X. 82. If it be asked, ‘How shall it be, if he cannot maintain himself 
by either (of these occupations?’ the answer is), he may adopt a Vaisya’s 
mode of life, employing himself in agriculture and rearing cattle. 

X. 83. But a Brahamana, or a Kshatriya, living by a Vaisya’s mode 
of subsistence, shall carefully avoid (the pursuit of) agriculture, (which 
causes) injury to many beings and depends on others. 

X. 84. (Some) declare that agriculture is something excellent, (but) 
that means of subsistence is blamed by the virtuous; (for) the wooden 
(implement) with iron point injures the earth and (the beings) living 
in the earth. 

X. 85. But he who, through a want of means of subsistence, gives 
up the strictness with respect to his duties, may sell, in order to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


282 


282 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

increase his wealth, the commodities sold by Vaisyas, making (however) 
the (following) exceptions. 

It will be seen that the disabilities imposed upon a Brahmin last as 
long as he is prospering by the occupations which belong to him as of 
right. As soon as he is in distress and his disabilities vanish and he is 
free to do anything that he likes to do in addition to the occupations 
reserved to him and without ceasing to be a Brahmin. Further whether 
he is in distress or not is a matter which is left to the Brahmin to be 
decided in his own discretion. There is therefore no bar to prevent even 
a prosperous Brahmin to supplement his earnings by following any of 
the professions open to him in distress by satisfying his conscience. 

There are other provisions in Manu Smriti intended to materially 
benefit the Brahmanas. They are Dakshina and Dana, Dakshina is the 
fee which the Brahmin is entitled to charge when he is called to perform 
a religious ceremony. Brahmanism is full of rites and ceremonies. It 
is not very difficult to imagine how great must this source of income 
be to every Brahmin. There was no chance of a priest being cheated 
of his fees. The religious sense attached to Dakshina was a sufficient 
sanction for regular payment. But Manu wanted to give the Brahmins 
the right to recover his fees. 

XI. 38. A Brahamana who, though wealthy, does not give, as fee 
for the performance of an Agnyadheya, a horse sacred to Prajapati, 
becomes (equal to one) who has not kindled the sacred fires. 

XI. 39. Let him who has faith and controls his senses, perform other 
meritorious acts, but let him on no acount offer sacrifices at which he 
gives smaller fees (than those prescribed). 

XI. 40. The organs (of sense and action), honour, (bliss in) heaven, 
longevity, fame, offspring, and cattle are destroyed by a sacrifice at 
which (too) small sacrificial fees are given; hence a man of small means 
should not offer a (Srauta) sacrifice. 

He even goes to the length of excusing a Brahmin by declaring 
that anything done by him to recover his fees shall not be an offence 
under the law. 

VIII. 349. In their own defence, in a strife for the fees of officiating 
priests and in order to protect women and Brahmanas; he who (under 
such circumstances kills in the cause of right, commits no sin. 

But it is the provision of Dana which makes a fruitful source of 
income to the Brahmins. Manu exhorts the King to make Dana to 
Brahmins. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


283 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 283 

VII. 79. A King shall offer various (Srauta) sacrifices at which 
liberal fees (are distributed), and in order to acquire merit, he shall 
give to Brahmanas enjoyments and wealth. 

VII. 82. Let him honour those Brahmanas who have returned from 
their teacher’s house (after studying the Veda); for that (money which 
is given) to Brahmanas is declared to be an imperishable treasure 
for kings. 

VII. 83. Neither thieves nor foes can take it, nor can it be lost; hence 
an imperishable store must be deposited by kings with Brahmanas. 

XI. 4. But a king shall bestow, as is proper, jewels of all sorts, and 
presents for the sake of sacrifices on Brahmanas learned in the Vedas. 

This admonition by Manu to the King did not remain a mere 
hope for the Brahmin. For as history shows that this exhortation 
was fully exploited by the Brahmins as the number of dana patras 
discovered by Archialogists indicate. It is astounding how the kings 
were befooled by the Brahmins to transfer village after village to 
crafty, lazy and indolent Brahmins. Indeed a large part of the wealth 
of the present day Brahmins lies in this swindle practised by wily 
Brahmins upon pious but foolish kings. Manu was not content to 
let the Brahmin prey upon the King for dana. He also allowed the 
Brahmin to prey upon the public in the mattter of dana. This Manu 
does in three different ways. In the first place he exhorts people to 
make gifts as a part of the duty owed by the pious to himself at 
the same time pointing out that the highest dana to a Brahmin.: 

VII. 85. A gift to one who is not a Brahmana (yields) the ordinary 
(reward); a gift to one who calls himself a Brahmana, a double (reward); 
a gift to a well-read Brahmana, a hundred thousandfold (reward); (a 
gift) to one who knows the Veda and the Angas (Vedaparanga), (a 
reward) without end. 

VII. 86. For according to the particular qualities of the recipient 
and according to the faith (of the giver) a small or a great reward 
will he obtained for a gift in the next world. 

In the next place Manu declares that in certain circumstances 
dana to a Brahmin is compulsory. 

XI. 1. Him who wishes (to marry for the sake of having) offspring, 
him who wishes to perform a sacrifice, a traveller, him who has given 
away all his property, him who begs for the sake of his teacher, his 
father, or his mother, a student of the Veda, and a sick man. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


284 


284 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

XI. 2 These nine Brahmanas one should consider as Snatakas, begging 
in order to fulfill the sacred law; to such poor men gifts must be given 
in proportion to their learning. 

XI. 3. To these most excellent among the twice-born, food and presents 
(of money) must be given; it is declared that food must be given to others 
outside the sacrificial enclosure. 

XI. 6. One should give, according to one’s ability, wealth to Brahmanas 
learned in the Veda and living alone; (thus) one obtains after death 
heavenly bliss. 

The third method adopted by Manu to make the rule of Dana become 
a source of secure and steady income is beyond question the most 
ingenuous one. Manu linked up dana with penance. In the Scheme of 
Manu, an improper act may be a sin although not an offence or it may 
be both a sin as well as an offence. As a sin its punishment is a matter 
for canonical law. As an offence its punishment is a matter of secular 
law. As sin, the improper act is called Pataka and the punishment for 
it is called Penance. In the Scheme of Manu every Pataka must be 
expunged by the performance of a penance. 

XI. 44. A man who omits a prescribed act, or performs a blameable 
act, or cleaves to sensual enjoyments, must perform a penance. 

XI. 45. (All) sages prescribe a penance for a sin unintentionally 
committed; some declare, on the evidence of the revealed texts, (that it 
may be performed) even for an intentional (offences). 

XI. 46. A sin unintentionally committed is expiated by the recitation 
of Vedic texts, but that which (men) in their folly commit intentionally, 
by various (special) penances. 

XI. 53. Thus in consequence of a remnant of (the guilt of former) 
crimes, are born idiots, dumb, blind, deaf and deformed men, who are 
(all) despised by the virtuous. 

XL. 54. Penances, therefore, must always be performed for the sake 
of purification, because those whose sins have not been expiated, are 
born (again) with disgraceful marks. 

The penances prescribed by Manu are many and the curious may 
refer to the Manu Smriti itself for a knowledge of what they are. What 
is worthy of note is these penances are calculated to materially benefit 
the Brahmin. Some penances take the form of a simple dana to the 
Brahmin. Others prescribe the performance of some religious rites. But 
as religious rites cannot be performed by anybody except by a Brahmin 
and that the performance of religious rite requires the payment of fees 
the Brahmin alone can be the beneficiary of the dana system. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


285 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 285 

It is therefore absurd to suggest that Manu wanted to place before 
the Brahmins the ideal of humility, poverty and service. The Brahmins 
certainly did not understand Manu that way. Indeed they believed that 
they were made a privileged class. Not only they believed in it but they 
sought to extend their privileges in other directions a matter which will 
be discussed later on. They were perfectly justified, in their view. Manu 
called the Brahmins the ‘lords of the earth * and he framed (the law) 
with such care that they shall remain so. 

Having made full provision for Brahmin Rule and Brahmin dominance 
Manu next launches out to transform society to suit his purposes. 

The transformation of Varna into Caste is the most stupendous and 
selfish task in which Brahmanism after its triumph became primarily 
engaged. We have no explicit record of the steps that Brahmanism took 
to bring about this change. On the contrary we have a lot of confused 
thinking on the relation between Varna and Caste. Some think that Varna 
and Caste are the same. Those who think that they are different seem 
to believe that Varna became caste when prohibition on intermarriage 
became part of the social order. All this, of course, is erroneous and 
the error is due to the fact that Manu in transforming the Varna into 
Caste has nowhere explained his ends and how his means are related 
to those ends. Oscar Wilde has said that to be intelligible is to be 
found out. Manu did not wish to be found out. He is therefore silent 
about his ends and means, leaving people to imagine them. For Hindus 
the subject is important beyond measure. An attempt at clarification 
is absolutely essential so that the confusion due to different people 
imagining differently the design of Manu may be removed and light 
thrown on the way how Brahmanism proceeded to give a wrong and 
pernicious turn to the original idea of Varna as the basis of society. 

As I said Manu’s ways are silent and subterranean and we cannot 
give the detailed and chronological history of this conversion of Varna 
into Caste. But fortunately there are landmarks which are clear enough 
to indicate how the change was brought about. 

Before proceeding to describe how this change was brought about 
let me clear the confusion between Varna and Caste. This can 
best be done by noting the similarities and differences between the 
two. Varna and Caste are identical in their de jure connotation. 
Both connote status and occupation. Status and occupation are the. 
two concepts which are implied both in the notion Varna as well 
as in the notion of Caste. Varna and Caste however differ in one 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


286 


286 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

important particular. Varna is not hereditary either in status or 
occupation. On the other hand Caste implies a system in which status 
and occupation are hereditary and descend from father to son. 

When I say that Brahmanism converted Varna into Caste what I 
mean is that it made status and occupation hereditary. 

How was this transformation effected? As I said there are no foot . 
prints left of the steps taken by Brahmanism to accomplish this change 
but there are landmarks which serve to give us a clear view of how the 
deed came to be done. 

The change was accomplished by stages. In the transformation of 
Varna into Caste three stages are quite well marked. The first stage was 
the stage in which the duration of Varna i.e. of status and occupation 
of a person was for a prescrbied period of time only. The second stage 
was a stage in which the status and occupation involved the Varna of 
a person ensured during lifetime only. The third stage was a stage in 
which the status and occupation of the Varna became hereditary. To use 
legal language the Estate conferred by Varna was at the beginning an 
Estate for a term only. Thereafter it became a life Estate and finally it 
became an Estate of inheritance which is tantamount to saying that Varna 
became Caste. That these are the stages by which Varna was converted 
into Caste seems to have ample support from tradition as recorded in 
the religious literature . 1 There is no reason why this tradition should not 
be accepted as embodying some thing that is quite genuine. According 
to this tradition, the task of determining Varna of a person was effected 
by a body of officers called Manu and Sapta Rishis. From the mass of 
people Manu selected those who were fit to be Kshatriyas and Vaishas 
and the Sapta Rishis selected those who were fit to be Brahmanas. After 
this selection was made by Manu and Sapta Rishis for being Brahmins, 
Kshatriyas, Vaishas, the rest that were not selected were called Shudras. 
The Varna arrangement so determined lasts for one Yug i.e. a period 
of four years. Every fourth year a new body of officers known by the 
same designation Manu and Sapta Rishi were appointed for making 
a new selection. It happened that last time some of those who were 
left to be fit only for being Shudras were selected for being Brahmins, 
Kshatriyas and Vaishyas while some of those who were, elected last 
time for being Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas were left as being fit 
only of being Shudras. Thus the personnel of the Varna changed. It was 

1 I am here following the clues supplied by the investigations of Mr. Daphtary and 
Pradnayneshwar Yati. The former’s Dharma Rahasya and the letter’s Chaturvarnya are 
very valuable as they are quite original in their point of view. The subject of course needs 
to be further investigated along the lines suggested by them. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


287 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 287 

a sort of a periodical shuffling and selection of men to take up according to 
their mental and physical aptitudes and occupations which were essential 
to the life of the community. The time when the reshuffling of the Varnas 
took place was called Manwantar which etymologically means change of 
Varna made by Manu. The word Manwantar also means the period for 
which the Varna of an individual was fixed. The word Manwantar is very 
rich in its contents and expresses the essential elements of the Varna 
system which were two. First it shows that Varna was determined by 
an independent body of people called Manu and Saptarshi. Secondly it 
shows that the Varna was for a period after which a change was made 
by Manu 1 . According to ancient tradition as embodied in the Puranas the 
period for which the Varna of a person was fixed by Manu and Saptarshi 
was a period of four years and was called Yug. At the end of the period 
of four years there occured the Manwantar whereby every fourth year 
the list was revised. Under the revision some changed their old Varna, 
some retained it, some lost it and some gained it . 2 

The original system seems to have in contemplation the determination 
of the Varna of adults. It was not based on prior training or close 
scrutiny of bias and aptitude. Manu and Saptarshi was a sort of a 
Board of Interview which determined the Varna of a person from how 
he struck them at the interview. The determination of the Varna was 
done in a rough and tumble manner. This system seems to have gone 
into abeyance. A new system grew up in its place. It was known as 
the Gurukul system. The Gurukul was a school maintained by a Guru 
(teacher) also called Acharya (learned man). All children went to this 
Gurukul for their education. The period of education extended for twelve 
years. The child while at Gurukul was known as Bramhachari. After 
the period of education was over there was the Upanayan ceremony 
performed at the Gurukul by the Acharya. The Upanayan ceremony 
was the most important ceremony. It was a ceremony at which the 
Acharya determined the Varna of the student and sent him out in the 
world to perform the duties of that Varna. Upanayan by the Acharyas 
was the new method of determining Varna which came into vogue in 
place of method of determination by Manu and Saptarshi. The new 
method was undoubtedly superior to the old method. It retained the 


1 One can now see why Sumati Bhargava called his code as the Code of Manu. He wanted 
to invest it with the dignity and authority of the ancient law-giver Manu. 

2 This is the only theory which can explain how some of the Mantras of the Vedas are 
admitted to have been made by Shudras, a question which in view of the statement of 
Manu that the Shudras must not recite the Vedas, nor hear them recited becomes a very 
puzzling question. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


288 


288 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

true feature of the old method namely that the Varna should be determined 
by a disinterested and independent body. But it added a new feature 
namely training as a pre-requisite for assignment of Varna. On the 
ground that training alone developes individual in the make up of a 
person and the only safe way to determine the Varna of a person is to 
know his individuality, the addition of this new feature was undoubtedly 
a great improvement. 

With the introduction of the Acharya Gurukul system, the duration 
of the Varna came to be altered. Varna instead of being Varna for a 
period became Varna for life. But it was not hereditary. 

Evidently Brahmanism was dissatisfied with this system. The reason 
for dissatisfaction was quite obvious. Under the system as prevalent 
there was every chance of the Acharya declaring the child of a Brahmin 
as fit only to be a Shudra. Brahmanism was naturally most anxious to 
avoid this result. It wanted the Varna to be hereditary. Only by making 
the Varna hereditary could it save the children of the Brahmins from 
being declared Shudra. To achieve this Brahmanism proceeded in the 
most audacious manner one can think of. 

Ill 

Brahmanism made three most radical changes in the system of 
determing the Varna of the child. In the first place the system of 
Gurukul as the place where training to the child was given and its 
Varna was determined by the Guru at the end of the period of training 
was abolished. Manu is quite aware of the Gurukul and refers to 
Guruvas 1 i.e. training and residence in the Gurukul under the Guru. 
But does not refer to it at all in connection with the Upanayan. He 
abolishes the Guru as an authority competent to perform Upanayan 
by omitting to make even the remotest reference to him in connection 
with Upanayan. In place of the Guru Manu allows the Upanayan of 
the child to be performed by its father athome . 2 Secondly Upanayan 
was made into a Sanskara i.e. a sacrament. In olden times Upanayan 
was like a convocation ceremony 3 held by the Guru to confer degrees 
obtained by students in his Gurukul in which certificates of proficiency 
in the duties of a particular Varna were granted. In Manu’s law that 
Upanayan was a complete change in the meaning and purpose of this 
most important institution. Thirdly the relation of training to Upanayan 
was totally reversed. In the olden system training came before Upanayan. 


1 Manu II. 67 Where Manu. 

2 Manu II, 36-37. 

3 On this point see Pradnaneshwar Yati’s booklet on Upnayan. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


289 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 289 

Under the Brahmanism Upanayan came before training. Manu directs 
that a child be sent to the Guru for training but that is after Upanayan 
i.e. after 1 his Varna is determined by his father. 

The principal change made by Brahmanism was the transfer of authority 
from the Guru to the father in the matter of performing Upanayan. The 
result was that the father having the right to perform the Upanayan of 
his child gave his own Varna to the child and thus made it hereditory. 
It is by divesting the Guru of his authority to determine the Varna and 
vesting it in the father that Brahmanism ultimately converted Varna 
into Caste. 

Such is the story of the transformation of Varna into Caste. The story 
of the transition from one to the other is of course reconstructed. For 
the reasons already given it may not be quite as accurate as one would 
wish it to be in all its details. But I have no doubt that the stages and 
the ways by which Varna ceased to exist and caste came into being 
must be some such as have been suggested in the foregoing discussion 
of the subject. 

What object Brahmanism could have had in converting Varna into 
caste it is not difficult to imagine. The object was to make the high 
status enjoyed by the Brahmins from ancient times the privilege of every 
Brahmin and his progeny without reference to merits or to qualifications. 
To put it differently the object was to elevate and ennoble every Brahmin, 
however mean and worthless he may be, to the high status occupied by 
some of them on account of the virtue. It was an attempt to ennoble 
the whole of the Brahmin Community without exception. 

That this was the object of Brahmanism is clear from Manu’s ordinances. 
Manu knew that making Varna hereditary, the most ignorant Brahmin 2 
will be elevated to the status occupied by the most learned Brahmin. 
He feared that the former may not be respected as much as the most 
learned, which was the object of this attempt at the ennoblement of the 
whole class of Brahmins. Manu is very much concerned about the ignorant 
Brahmin — a new thing — and warns people against being disrespectful 
to an ignorant and mean Brahmin. 

IX. 317. A Brahmin, whether learned or ignornt, is a powerful divinity; 
even as fire is powerful divinity, whether consecrated or popular. 

IX. 319. Thus although Brahmins employ themselves in all sorts 
of mean ocupations, they must invariably be honoured; for they are 
something transcendently divine. 

1 Manu II. 69. 

2 Under the Varna there could be no ignorant Brahmin. The possibility of an ignorant 
Brahmin can arise only when Varna becomes Caste i.e. when one becomes a Brahmin 
only by reason of birth. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


290 


290 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Such a warning was unnecessary if the object was to ennoble the whole 
Brahmin class. Here is a case where vice refuses to pay to virtue even 
the homage of hypocracy. Can there be greater moral degeneracy than 
what is shown by Manu in insisting upon the worship of the Brahmin 
even if he is mean and ignorant? 

So much for the object of change from Varna to caste. What have 
been the consequences of this change? 

From the spiritual point of view the consequences have been too 
harmful to be contemplated with equanimity. The harm done may 
perhaps be better realized by comparing the position of the Brahmin 
as a priest resulting from the law of Manu with that of the law of the 
clergy under the Church of England. There the clergy is subject to the 
criminal law as every citizen is. But in addition to that he is always 
subject to Church Descipline Act. Under the Criminal Law he would 
be punished if he officiated as a clergy without being qualified for it. 
Under the Church Discipline Act he would be liable to be disqualified 
as a clergy for conduct which would be deemed to be morally wrong 
although it did not amount to a crime. This double check on the clergy 
is held justifiable because learning and morality are deemed to be quite 
essential for the profession of the clergy who are supposed to administer 
to the spiritual needs of the people. Under Brahmanism the Brahmin 
who alone can be the clergy need not possess learning or morality. Yet 
he is in sole charge of the spiritual affairs of the people!! On the value 
of a creed which permits this, comment is unnecessary. 

From the secular point of view, the consequences of this transformation 
of Varna into Caste has to introduce a most pernicious mentality among 
the Hindus. It is to disregard merit and have regard only to birth. If one 
is descended from the high he has respect although he may be utterly 
devoid of merit or worth. One who is of high birth will be superior to 
the one who is of low birth although the latter may be superior to the 
former in point of worth. Under Brahmanism it is birth that always 
wins, whether it is against birth or against worth. Merit by itself can win 
no meads. This is entirely due to the dissociation of merits from status 
which is the work of Brahmanism. Nothing could be better calculated to 
produce an unprogressive society which sacrifices the rights of intelligence 
on the altar of aristocratic privilege. 

Now the third deed in the catalogue of deeds done by Brahmanism 
after its triumph over Buddhism. It was to separate the Brahmins from 
the result of the Non-Brahmin population and to sever the different 
social strata of the Non-Brahmin population. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


291 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 291 

Pushyamitra’s Brahmanic Revolution was undertaken for the 
purposes of restoring the ancient social system of Chaturvarna which 
under the Buddhist regime was put into the melting pot. But when 
Brahmanism triumphed over Buddhism it did not content itself with 
merely restoring Charutvarna as it was in its original form. The system 
of Chaturvarna of the Pre-Buddhist days was a flexible system and 
was an open to system. This was because the Varna system had no 
connection with the marriage system. While Chaturvarna recognized 
the existence of four different classes, it did not prohibit inter-marriage 
between them. A male of one Varna could lawfully marry a female of 
another Varna. There are numerous illustrations in support of this 
view. I give below some instances which refer to well known and 
respectable individuals which have acquired a name and fame in the 
sacred lore of the Hindus. 


Husband 

His Varna 

Wife 

Her Varna 

1. Shantanu 

Kshatriya 

Ganga 

Shudra Anamik 

2. Shantanu 

Kshatriya 

Matsyagandha 

Shudra Fisher woman 

3. Parashara 

Brahmin 

Matsyagandha 

Shudra Fisher woman 

4. Vishwamitra 

Kshatriya 

Menaka 

Apsara 

5. Yayati 

Kshatriya 

Devayani 

Brahmin 

6. Yayati 

Kshatriya 

Sharmishta 

Asuri — Non-Aryan 

7. Jaratkaru 

Brahmin 

Jaratkari 

Nag — Non-Aryan 


Should anybody retain doubt on the question that the division of 
the society into classes did not prohibit intermarriages between the 
four Varnas let him consider the geneology of the family of the great 
Brahmin sage Vyas. 

GENEOLOGY OF VYAS 

Varuna Mitra = Urvashi 

^ Vashishtha = Akshamala 
Shakti = 

Parashara = Matsyagandha 
= Vyas 

Brahmintsm with the ferocity of an outraged brute proceeded to put a 
stop to these intermarriage between the different Varnas. A new law is 
proclaimed by Manu. It is in the following terms: — 

III. 12. For the first marriage of twice born men (wives) of equal 
caste are recommended. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


292 


292 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

III. 13. It is declared that a Sudra woman alone can be the wife of 
a Shudra. 

III. 14. A Shudra woman is not mentioned even in any (ancient) story 
as the (first) wife of a Brahmana or of a Kshatriya, though they lived 
in the (greatest) distress. 

III. 15. Twice-born men who, in their folly, wed wives of the low 
(Sudra) caste, soon degrade their families and their children to the 
state of Sudras. 

III. 16. According to Atri and to (Gautama) the son of Utathya, he 
who weds a Sudra woman becomes an outcast, according to Saunakaon 
the birth of a son, and according to Bhrigu he who has (male)offspring 
from a (Sudra female, alone). 

III. 17. A Brahmana who takes a Sudra wife to his bed, will (after 
death) sink into hell; if he begets a child by her, he will lose the rank 
of a Brahmana. 

III. 18. The manes and the gods will not eat the (offerings) of that 
man who performs the rites in honour of the gods, of the manes, and 
of guests chiefly with a (Sudra wife’s) assistance, and such (a man) will 
not go to heaven. 

III. 19. For him who drinks the moisture of a Sudra’s lips, who is 
tainted by her breath, and who begets a son on her, no expiation is 
prescribed. 

Brahmanism was not satisfied with the prohibition of intermarriage. 
Brahmanism went further and prohibited interdining. 

Manu lays down certain interdicts on food. Some are hygenic. Some 
are social. Of the social the following are worthy of attention: 

IV. 218. Food given by a king, impairs his manly vigour; by one of the 
servile class, his divine light; by goldsmiths, his life; by leathercutters, 
his good name. 

IV. 219. Given by cooks and the like mean artizans, it destroys his 
offsprings: by a washerman, his muscular strength; 

IV. 221. That of all others, mentioned in order, whose food must 
never be tasted, is held equal by the wise to the skin, bones, and hair 
of the head. 

IV. 222. Having unknowingly swallowed the food of any such persons, 
he must fast during three days; but having eaten it knowingly, he 
must perform the same harsh penance, as if he had tasted any seminal 
impurity, ordure, or urine. 

I said that Brahmanism acted with the ferocity of an outranged brute 
in undertaking the task of prohibiting intermarriage and interdining. 
Those who have doubts in this matter ponder over the language of Manu. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


293 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 293 

Mark the disguest Manu shows with regard to the Shudra woman. 

Mark what Manu says about the food of the Shudra. He says it is 
as impure as semen or urine. 

These two laws have produced the caste system. Prohibition of 
intermarriage and prohibition against interdining are two pillars on 
which it rests. The caste system and the rules relating to intermarriage 
and interdining are related to each other as ends to means. Indeed by 
no other means could the end be realized. 

The forging of these means shows that the creation of the caste system 
was end and aim of Brahmanism. Brahmanism enacted the prohibitions 
against intemarriage and interdining. But Brahmanism introduced 
other changes in the social system and if the purposes underlying these 
changes are those which I suggest them to be, then it must be admitted 
that Brahmanism was so keen in sustaining the caste system that it 
did not mind whether ways and means employed were fair or unfair, 
moral or immoral. I refer to the laws contained in the Code of Manu 
regarding marriage of girls and the life of widows. 

See the law that Manu promulgates regarding the marriage of females. 

IX. 4. Reprehensible is the father who gives not (his daughter) in 
marriage at the proper time. 

IX. 88. To a distinguished, handsome suitor of equal caste should a 
father give his daughter in accordance with the prescribed rule, though 
she have not attained (the proper age), i.e. although she may not have 
reached puberty. 

By this rule Manu enjoins that a girl should be married even though 
she may not have reached the age of puberty i.e. even when she is a 
child. 

Now with regard to widows Manu promulgates the following rule. 

V. 157. At her pleasure let her (i.e. widow) emaciate her body, by 
living voluntarily on pure flowers, roots and fruits; but let her not, 
when her lord is deceased, even pronounce the name of another man. 

V. 161. But a widow, who from a wish to bear children, slights her 
deceased husband by marrying again, brings disgrace on herself here 
below, and shall be excluded from the seat of her lord (in heaven). 

V. 162. Offspring begotten on a woman by any other than her husband, 
is here declared to be no progeny of hers; no more than a child, begotten 
on the wife of another man belongs to the begetter; nor is a second 
husband any where prescribed for a virtuous woman. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


294 


294 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

This is the rule of enforced widowhood for a woman. A reference may 
also be made to Sati or a widow who burns herself on the funeral pyre 
of her husband and thus puts an end to her life. Manu is silent about it. 

Yajnavalkya 1 an authority nearly as great as Manu says, she must 
not live separately or alone. 

86. When deprived of her husband, she must not remain away from 
her father, mother, son, brother, mother-in-law or from her maternal 
uncle; otherwise she might become liable to censure. 

Here again Yajnavalkya does not suggest that a widow become a 
Sati. But Vijnaneshwar, the author of Mitakshara a commentary on 
Yajnavalkya Smriti makes the following observation in commenting on 
the above Sloka. 

“This is in the case of the alternative of leading a celibate life vide 
the text of Vishnu 2 : “After the death of the husband, either celibacy or 
ascending the (cremation) pile after him.” 

Vijnaneshwar 3 adds as his opinion that ‘There is great merit in 
ascending the funeral pyre after him.’ 

From this one can very easily and clearly see how the rule of Sati came 
to be forged. Manu’s rule was that a widow was not to remarry. But it 
appears from the statement by Vijnaneshwar that from the time of the 
Vishnu Smriti a different interpretation began to put on the ordinance 
of Manu. According to this new interpretation Manu’s rule was explained 
to be offering to the widow a choice between two alternatives: (1) Either 
burn yourself on your husband’s funeral pyre or (2) If you don’t, remain 
unmarried. This of course is totally false interpretation quite unwarranted 
by the clear words of Manu. Somehow it came to be accepted. The date 
of the Vishnu Smriti is somewhere about the 3rd or 4th Century. It can 
therefore be said that rule of Sati dates from this period. 

One thing is certain, these were new rules. The rule of Manu that 
girl should be married before she has reached puberty is a new rule. 
In Pre-Buddhistic Brahmanism 4 marriages were performed not only 
after puberty but they were performed when girls had reached an age 
when they could be called grown up. Of this there is ample evidence. 
Similarly the rule that a woman once she had lost her husband 
must not remarry is a new rule. In the Pre-Buddhist Brahmanism 
there was no prohibition on widow remarriage. The fact that the 
Sanskrit language contains words such as Punarbhu (woman who has 

1 The date of the Yajnavalkya Smriti is betwen 150-200 A.D. 

2 Vishnu Smriti Ch. XXV 14. 

3 He wrote his Mitakshara between 1070 and 1100 A.D. 

4 See kane — History of Dharmashastra I. Part I. page. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


295 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 295 

undergone a second marriage ceremony) and punarbhav (second husband) 
show that such marriages were quite common under the Pre- Buddhist 
Brahmanism . 1 With regard to Sati the position as to when it arose , 2 
there is evidence to suggest that it existed in ancient times. But there is 
evidence that it had died out and it was revived after Brahmanism under 
Pushyamitra obtained its victory over Buddhism although it was some time 
later than Manu. 

Question is this, why these changes were made by the triumphant 
Brahmanism? What did Brahmanism want to achieve by having girls 
married before they had become pubert, by denying the widow to the right 
to marry again and by telling her to put herself to death by immolating 
herself in the funeral pyre of her deceased husband? No explainations are 
forthcoming for these changes. Mr. C. V. Vaidya who offers an explanation 
for girl marriage says 3 that girl marriage was introduced to prevent girls 
from joining the Buddhist order of nuns. This explanation does not satisfy 
me. Mr. Vaidya omits to take into consideration another rule laid down by 
Manu — namely the rule relating to suitable age for marriage. According 
to that rule. 

IX. 94. A man, aged thirty, shall marry a maiden of twelve who pleases 

him, or a man of twenty-four a girl eight years of age. 

The question is not why girl marriage was introduced. The question is 
why Manu allowed so much discrepancy in the ages of the bride and the 
bridegroom. 

Mr. Kane 4 has attempted an explanation of Sati. His explanation is 
that there is nothing new in it. It existed in India in ancient times as it 
did in other parts of the world. This again does not satisfy the world. If it 
existed outside India, it has not been practised on so enormous a scale as in 
India. Secondly if traces of it are found in Ancient India in the Kshatriyas, 
why was it revived, why was it not universalized? There is no satisfactory 
explanation. Mr. Kane’s explanation that the prevalence of Sati by reference 
to laws of inheritance does not appear to me very convincing. It may be 
that because under the Hindu Law of inheritance as it prevailed in Bengal, 
women got a share in property. The relations of the husband of the widow 
pressed her to be a Sati in order to get rid of a share may explain why 
Sati was practised on so large a scale in Bengal. But it does not explain 
how it arose nor how it came to be practised in other parts of India. 

Again with regard to the prohibition of widow remarriage, there 
is no explanation whatsoever. Why was the widow, contrary to 

1 See Kane — History of Dharmashastra, Vol. II, Part II Chapt. 

2 The available evidence on Sati has been collected by Kane in his History of Dharmashastra 
Vol. II Part I pp. 617-636. 

3 History of India Vol. II. 

4 History or Dharmashastra. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


296 


296 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

established practice, prohibited from marrying? Why was she required 
to lead a life of misery? Why was she disfigured? 

My explanation for girl marriage, enforced widowhood and Sati is 
quite different and I offer it for what it is worth . 1 

“Thus the superposition of endogamy over exogamy means the 
creation of Caste. But this is not an easy affair. Let us take an 
imaginary group that desire to make itself into a caste and analyse 
what means it will have to adopt to make itself endogamous. If a 
group desires to make itself endogamous, a formal injunction against 
intermarriage with outside groups will be of no avail, especially if 
prior to the introduction of endogamy, exogamy were to be the rule 
in all matrimonial relations. Again there is a tendency in all groups 
living in close contact with one another to assimilate and amalgamate, 
and thus consolidate into a homogeneous society. If this tendency be 
strongly counteracted in the interest of Caste formation, it is absolutely 
necessary to circumscribe a circle without which people should not 
contract marriages.” 

“Nevertheless this encircling to prevent marriages from without 
creates problems from within which are not very easy of solution. 
Roughly speaking in a normal group the two sexes are more or less 
evenly distributed, and generally speaking there is an equality between 
those of the same age. But this equality is never quite realised in actual 
societies. While to the group that is desirous of making itself into a 
caste the maintenance of this equality between the sexes becomes the 
ultimate goal, for without this endogamy can no longer subsist. In other 
words, if endogamy is to be preserved, conjugal rights from within have 
to be provided for, else members of the group will be driven out of the 
circle to take care of themselves in any way they please. But in order 
that the conjugal rights be provided for from within, it is absolutely 
necessary to maintain a numerical equality between the marriageable 
units of the two sexes within the group desirous of making itself into 
a Caste. It is only through the maintenance of this equality that the 
necessary endogamy of the group could be kept intact, and a very 
large disparity is sure to break it.” 

“The problem of Caste then ultimately resolves itself into one of 
repairing the disparity between the marriageable units of the two sexes 
within it. The much needed parity between the units could be realized 
only when a couple dies simultaneously. But this is a rare contingency. 
The husband may die before the wife and create a surplus woman who 
must be disposed of, else through intermarriage she will violate the 
endogamy of the group. In like manner the husband may survive his 

1 They will be found in my paper on “Castes in India” which appeared in The Indian 
Antiquarry for May, 1917. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


297 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 297 

wife and be a surplus man whom the group, while it may sympathise 
with him for the sad bereavement, has to dispose of, else he will 
marry outside the Caste and will break the endogamy. Thus both the 
surplus man and the surplus woman constitute a menace to the Caste 
if not taken care of, for, not Finding suitable partners inside their 
prescribed circle (and they cannot find any, for there are just enough 
pairs to go round) very likely they will transgress the boundary, marry 
outside and import population that is foreign to the Caste. Let us see 
what our imaginary group is likely to do with this surplus man and 
surplus woman. We will first take up the case of the surplus woman. 
She can be disposed of in two different ways so as to preserve the 
endogamy of the Caste.” 

“First : burn her on the funeral pyre of her deceased husband and 
get rid of her. This, however, is rather an impracticable way of solving 
the problem of sex disparity. In some cases it may work, in others it 
may not. Consequently every surplus woman cannot thus be disposed 
of, because it is an easy solution but a hard realization. However, the 
surplus woman (widow) if not disposed of, remains in the group: but 
in her very existence lies a double danger. She may marry outside the 
Caste and violate to endogamy or she may marry within the Caste 
and through competition encroach upon the chances of marriage that 
must be reserved for the potential brides in the Caste. She therefore 
is a menace in any case and something must be done to her if she 
cannot be burned along with her deceased husband.” 

“The second remedy is to enforce widowhood on her for the rest of 
her life. So far as the objective results are concerned burning is a better 
solution than enforcing widowhood. Burning the widow eliminates all 
the three evils that a surplus woman is fraught with. Being dead and 
gone she creates no problem of remarriage either inside or outside 
the Caste. But compulsory widowhood is superior to burning because 
it is more practicable. Besides being comparatively humane it also 
guards against the evils of remarriage as does burning; but it fails to 
guard the morals of the group. No doubt under compulsory widowhood 
the woman remains and, just because she is deprived of her natural 
right of being a legitimate wife in future, the incentive to bad moral 
conduct is increased. But this is by no means an insuperable’ difficulty. 
She can be degraded to a condition where she could no longer be a 
source of allurement.” 

“The problem of surplus man ( — widower) is much more important 
and much more difficult than that of the surplus woman in a group 
that desires to make itself into a Caste. From time immemorial man 
as compared with woman has had the upper hand. He is a dominant 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


298 


298 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

figure in every group and of the two sexes has greater prestige. With 
this traditional superiority of man over woman his wishes have always 
been consulted. Woman on the other hand has been an easy prey to 
all kinds of iniquitous injunctions, religious, social or economic. But 
man as a maker of injunctions is most often above them all. Such 
being the case you cannot accord the same kind of treatment to a 
surplus man as you can to a surplus woman in a Caste.” 

“The project of burning him with his deceased wife is hazardous in 
two ways: first of all it cannot be done, simply because he is a man. 
Secondly, if done, a sturdy soul is lost to the Caste. There remain 
then only two solutions which can conveniently dispose of him. I say 
conveniently because he is an asset to the group.” 

“Important as he is to the group, endogamy is still more important, 
and the solution must assure both these ends. Under these 
circumstances he may be forced, or I should say induced, after the 
manner of the widow to remain a widower for the rest of his life. 
This solution is not altogether difficult, for without there being any 
compulsion some are so disposed as to enjoy self-imposed celibacy or 
may even take a further step of their own accord to renounce the 
world and its joys. But, given human nature as it is, this solution 
can hardly be expected to bc\ realized. On the other hand, as is 
very likely to be the case, if he remains in the group as an active 
participator in group activities, he is a danger to the morals of the 
group. Looked at from a different view point, ceilibacy though easy 
in cases where it succeeds, is not so advantageous even then to the 
material prospects of the Caste. If he observes genuine celibacy and 
renounces the world, he would not be a menace to the preservation 
of Caste endogamy or Caste morals as undoubtedly would be, if he 
remained a secular person. But as an ascetic celibate he is as good 
as burned, so far as the material well-being of his Caste is concerned. 
A Caste, in order that it may be large enough to afford a vigorous 
communal life, must be maintained at a certain numerical strength. 
But to hope for this and to proclaim celibacy is the same as trying 
to cure atrophy by bleeding. 

“Imposing celibacy on the surplus man in the group therefore 
fails, both theoretically and practically. It is in the interest of the 
Caste to keep him as a Grahastha (one who raises a family) to use 
a Sanskrit technicality. But the problem is to provide him with a 
wife from within the Caste. At the outset this is not possible, for the 
ruling ratio in a caste has to be one man to one woman and none can 
have two chances of marriage, for in a Caste thoroughly self enclosed 
there are always just enough marriageable women to go round for the 
marriageable men. Under these circumstances the surplus man can 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


299 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 299 

only be provided with a wife by recruiting a bride from the ranks of 
those not yet marriageable in order to tie him down to the group. This 
is certainly the best of the possible solutions in the case of the surplus 
man. By this, he is kept within the Caste. By this, this numerical 
depletion through constant outflow is guarded against, and by this 
endogamy and morals are preserved. 

“It will now be seen that the four means by which numerical disparity 
between the two sexes is conveniently maintained are : (1) Burning 
the widow with her deceased husband; (2) Compulsory widowhood — a 
milder form of burning; (3) Imposing celibacy on the widower; 

(4) Wedding him to a girl not yet marriageable. Though as I said above, 
burning the widow and imposing celibacy on the widower are of doubtful 
service to the group in its endeavour to preserve its endogamy, all of 
them operate as means. But means as forces, when liberated or set in 
motion create an end. What then is the end that these means create? 
They create and perpetuate endogamy, while caste and endogamy, 
according to our analysis of the various definitions of caste, are one 
and the same thing. Thus the existence of these means means caste 
and caste involves these means.” 

“This, in my opinion, is the general mechanism of a caste in a 
system of castes. Let us now turn to the castes in the Hindu Society 
and inquire into their mechanism. I need hardly promise that there 
are a great many pitfalls in the path of those who try to unfold the 
past, and caste in India to be sure is a very ancient institutiion. This 
is especially true where there exist no authentic or written history or 
records or where the people, like the Hindus are so constituted that 
to them writing history is a folly, for the world is an illusion. But 
institutions do live, though for a long time they may remain unrecorded 
and as often as not customs and morals are like fossils that tell their 
own history. If this is true, our task will be amply rewarded if we 
scrutinize the solution the Hindus arrived at to meet the problems of 
the surplus man and surplus woman.” 

“Complex though it be in its general working the Hindu Society, 
even to a superficial observer, presents three singular uxorial customs, 
namely: — 

(i) Sati or the burning of the widow on the funeral pyre of her 
deceased husband. 

(ii) Enforced widowhood by which a widow is not allowed to 
remarry. 

(iii) Girl marriage. 

In addition to these, one also notes a great hankering after Sannyasa 
(renunciation) on the part of the widower, but it may in some cases be 
due purely to psychic disposition. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-03.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


300 


300 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“So far as I know, no scientific explanation of the origin of 
these customs is forth coming even today. We have plenty of 
philosophy to tell us why these customs were honoured. (Cf. 
A. K. Coomaraswamy — “Sati: a Defence of the Eastern Woman 
“in the British Sociological Review Vol. VI 1913) Because it is 
a “proof of the perfect unity of body and soul” between husband 
and wife and of “devotion beyond the grave”, because it embodied 
the ideal of wifehood which is well expressed by lima when she 
said “Devotion to her Lord is woman’s honour, it is her eternal 
heaven: and O Maheshwara”, she adds with a most touching 
human cry, “I desire not paradise itself if thou art not satisfied 
with me!” Why compulsory widowhood is honoured I know not 
nor have I yet met with anyone who sang in praise of it, though 
there are a great many who adhere to it. The eulogy in honour 
of girl marriage is reported by Dr. Ketkar to be as follows: “A 
really faithful man or woman ought not to feel affection for 
a woman or a man other than the one with whom he or she 
is united. Such purity is compulsory not only after marriage, 
but even before marriage, for that is the only correct ideal of 
chastity. No maiden could he considered pure if she feels love 
for a man other than to whom she might get married. As she 
does not know whom she is going to get married to, she must 
not feel affection for any man at all before marriage. If she does 
so, it is a sin. So it is better for a girl to know whom she has 
to love, before any sexual consciousness has been awakened in 
her”. Hence girl marriage. 

“This high-flown and ingenious sophistry indicates why these 
institutions were honoured, but does not tell us why they were 
practised. My own interpretation is that they were honoured 
because they were practised. Any one slightly acquainted with 
rise of individualism in the 18th century will appreciate my 
remark. At all times, it is the movement that is most important; 
and the philosophies grow around it long afterwards to justify 
it and give it a moral support. In like manner I urge that the 
very fact that these customs were so highly eulogized proves 
that they needed eulogy for their prevalence. Regarding the 
question as to why they arose, I submit that they were needed 
to create the structure of caste and the philosophies in honour 
of them were intended to popularize them or to gild the pill, 
as we might say, for they must have been so abominable and 
shocking to the sense of the unsophisticated that they needed a 
great deal of sweetening. These customs are essentially of the 
nature of means, though they are represented as ideals. But this 
should not blind us from understanding the results that flow 
from them. One might safely say that idealization of means is 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


301 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 


301 


necessary and in this particular case was perhaps motivated to 
endow them with greater efficacy. Calling means an end does not 
harm except that it disguises its real character, but it does not 
deprive it of its real nature, that of a means. You may pass a law 
that all cats are dogs, just as you can call a means an end. But 
you can no more change the nature of means thereby than you can 
turn cats into dogs; consequently I am justified in holding that, 
regard them as ends or as means, Sati, enforced widowhood and 
girl marriage are customs that were primarily intended to solve 
the problem of the surplus man and surplus woman in a caste and 
to maintain its endogamy. Strict endogamy could not be preserved 
without these customs, while caste without endogamy is fake.” 

According to my view girl marriage, enforced widowhood and Sati 
had no other purpose than that of supporting the Caste System which 
Brahmanism was seeking to establish by prohibiting intermarriage. It is 
difficult to stop intermarriage. Members of different castes are likely to go 
out of their Caste either for love or for necessity. It is to provide against 
necessity that Brahmanism made these rules. This is my explanation 
of these new rules, made by Brahmanism. That explanation may not 
be acceptable to all. But there can be no doubt that Brahmanism was 
taking all means possible to prevent intermarriages between the different 
classes taking place. 

Another illustration of this desire on the part of Brahmanism is to 
be found in the rule regarding excommunication promulgated by Manu. 

Manu says that a person who is excommunicated by his Caste is an 
outcast . 1 According to Manu an outcast is to be treated as though he 
was actually dead. Manu ordains that his obsequies should be performed 
and lays down the mode and manner of performing these obsequies of 
the outcast. 

XI. 183. The Sapindas and Samanodakas of an outcast must 
offer (a libation of) water (to him, as if he were dead), outside (the 
village), on an inauspicious day, in the evening and in the presence 
of the relatives, officiating priests, and teachers. 

XI. 184. A female slave shall upset with her foot a pot filled 
with water, as if it were for a dead person; (his Sapindas) as 
well as the Samanodakas shall be impure for a day and a night. 
Manu however allows the outcast to return to Caste on performing 
penance as will be seen from the following rules: 

XI. 187. But when he has performed his penance, they shall 
bathe with him in a holy pool and throw down a new pot, filled 
with water. 

1 The outcast is quite different from un Untouchable as will be shown later. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


302 


302 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

XI. 188. But he shall throw that pot into water, enter his house and 
perform, as before, all the duties incumbent on a relative. 

XI. 189. Let him follow the same rule in the case of female outcasts; but 
clothes, food, and drink shall be given to them, and they shall live close 
to the (family) house. 

But if the outcast was recalcitrant and impenitent Manu provides for 
his punishment. 

Manu will not allow the outcast to live in the family house. Manu 
enjoins that 

XI. 189 Clothes, food, and drink shall be given to them (i.e. the 

outcast members of the family), and they shall live close to the (family) 
house. 

III. 92. Let him (i.e. the householder) gently place on the ground (some 
food) for dogs, outcasts, chandals, those aflicted with diseases that are 
punishments of former sins, crows and insects. 

Manu declares that having social intercourse with an outcast is a sin. 
He warns the Snataka 


IV. 79 not (to) stay together with outcasts. 

IV. 213 Not (to eat food given) by outcasts. 


To the householder Manu says: — 

III. 151. Let him (i.e. the householder) not entertain at a Shradha. 

III. 157. (A person) who forsakes his mother, his father, or a teacher 
without (sufficient) reason, he who has contracted an alliance with outcasts 
either through the Veda or through a marriage. 

Manu ordains a social boycott of the outcast by penalizing those who 
associate with him. 

XI. 181. He who associates himself for one year with an outcast himself 
becomes an outcast; not by sacrificing, reading the Veda, or contracting 
affinity with him, since by those acts he loses his class immediately, but 
even by using the same carriage or seat, or by taking his food at the same 
board. 

XI. 182. He who associates with any one of those outcasts, must perform, 
in order to atone for (such) intercourse, the penance prescribed for that 
(sinner). 

Then there are penalties against an outcast who defies his caste and 
choses to remain an outcast. Manu tells him what will be his penalty 
in the next world. 

XII. 60. He who has associated with outcasts (will) become Brahmarakshas 
(i.e. an evil spirit). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


303 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 303 

Manu however was not prepared to leave the outcast with this. He 
proceeds to enact penalty the severity of which cannot be doubted. The 
following are the penal sections of Manu Smriti against an outcast. 

III. 150 Those Brahmins who are outcasts 

Athesists are unworthy (to partake) of oblations to the gods and manes. 

IX. 201 Outcast receive(s) no share (in inheritance). 

XI. 185. But thenceforward (i.e. after the obsequies of the outcast 
have been performed) it shall be forbidden to converse with him, to 
sit with him, to give him a share of the inheritance, and to hold with 
him such intercourse as is usual among men; 

XI. 186. And (if the outcast be the eldest) his right of primogeniture 
shall be withheld and the additional share, due to the eldest son; and 
in his stead a younger brother, excelling in virtue (i.e. who observes 
the rule of caste) shall obtain the share of the eldest. 

Such is the law of Manu against an outcast. The severity of the 
penalties prescribed against him is quite obvious. Its effect is to 
exclude him from all social intercourse, to suspend him from every 
civil function, to disqualify him for all offices and to disable him 
from inheriting any property. Under these pains and penalties the 
outcaste might as well be dead which indeed Manu considers him to 
be, directing libations to be offered to the manes as though he was 
naturally so. This system of privations and mortifications was enforced 
by prescribing a similar fate to anyone who endeavoured to associate 
with an outcast. The penalty was not confined to the outcast. Nor was 
it restricted to males. Males and females were both subject to the law 
of the outcast. Even their progeny was subject to penalty. The law 
was extended to the son of the outcast. Born befo 

son was entitled to inherit immediately, as though his father was dead. 
Born after excommunication he lost his right to inherit, i.e. he became 
an outcast along with his father. 

The laws of Manu regarding the outcast are of course devoid of 
justice and humanity. Some might think that there is nothing very 
strange about them. That is because these laws are very similar to the 
laws against apostacy and heresy to be found in all religious codes. 
It is unfortunately a fact. All religions — Except Buddhism — have 
used or misued the laws of inheritance for enforcing adhesion and 
conformity to their codes. The conversion of a Christian to Judaism 
or paganism or any other religion was punished by the Emperors 
Constantines and Jul 

Emperors Theodosius and Valentiniaus added capital punishment, in 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


304 


304 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

case the apostle endeavoured to pervert others to the same inequity. 
This was borrowed by all the European countries 1 who maintained a 
similar system of penalities to enforce the Christian faith. 

Such a view of the law of the outcast would be quite superficial. 
First of all the outcast is a creation of Brahmanism. It is a necessary 
coefficient of caste. Indeed once Brahmanism was determined to create 
the caste system the law against the outcast was absolutely essential. 
For only by punishing the outcast can the caste system be maintained. 
Secondly there is a difference between the Christian or Mahomedan 
Law of Apostacy and the Brahmanic law of caste. The disqualification 
under the Christian or Mahomedan law of apostacy was restricted to 
want of religious belief or the profession of wrong religious belief. Under 
the Brahmanic law the disqualification had no connection with belief 
or want of belief. It was connected with the sanctity of a certain form 
of social organization — namely Caste. It is the act of going out of one’s 
caste that was made punishable. This is a very important difference. 

The Brahmanic law of the outcast as compared with the law of 
apostacy in other religions shows that a belief in God is not essential 
to Brahmanism; that a belief in life after death is not essential to 
Brahmanism; that a belief in salvation either by good deeds or by a 
belief in a prophet is not essential to Brahmanism; that a belief in the 
sacredness of the Vedas is essential to Brahmanism. This is only one 
thing that is essential to Brahmanism. For it is only breach of caste 
which is penalized. All else is left to violation. 

Those who are not blind to these forces of integration will admit that 
this act of Brahmanism in prohibiting intermarriage and interdining is 
nothing short of a complete dismemberment of society. It is a deathknell 
to unity, an effective bar to united action. As will be shown hereafter 
Brahmanism was keen on preventing united action by Non-Brahmins to 
overthrow Brahmanism and that is why Brahmanism brought about this 
segmentation of Indian Society. But the fatal effects of a poison can never 
be confined to the limits of the original intention of the perpetrator. The 
same thing has happened in the case of Caste. Brahmanism intended 
to paralyse the Non-Brahmans for action against Brahmins, it did not 
design that they as a nation should be paralysed for action against 
a foreign nation. But the result of the poison of Caste has been they 
have become stricken for action against Brahmanism as well as against 
foreigners. In other words Brahmanism in instituting Caste system has 
put the greatest impediment against the growth of nationalism. 

1 See Stephen’s Commentaries on the Laws of England (15th Ed.) Vo. IV. p. 179. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


305 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 305 

In spite of what others say the Hindu will not admit that there is any 
thing evil in the Caste system, and from one point of view he is right. 
There is love, unity and mutual aid among members of a family. There 
is honour among thieves. A band of robbers have common interests as 
respects to its members. Gangs are marked by fraternal feelings and 
intense loyalty to their own ends however opposed they may be to the 
other gangs. Following this up one can say that a Caste has got all the 
praiseworthy characteristics which a society is supposed to have. 

It has got the virtues of a family inasmuch as there is love unity and 
mutual aid. It has got the honour known to prevail among thieves. It has 
got the loyalty and fraternal feeling we meet with in gangs and it also 
possesses that sense of common interests which is found among robbers. 

A Hindu may take satisfaction in these praiseworthy characteristics of 
the Caste and deny that there is anything evil in it. But he forgets that 
his thesis that Caste is an ideal form of social organization is supportable 
on the supposition that each caste is entitled to regard himself as an 
independent society, as an end in itself as nations do. But the theory 
breaks down when the consideration pertains to Hindu Society and to 
the Caste-System which goes with it. 

Even in such a consideration of the subject the Hindu will not admit 
that the Caste system is an evil. Charge Hinduism with the responsibility 
for the evils of the Caste-system and the Hindu will at once retort, “What 
about the Class System in Europe?” Upto a point the retort is good if it 
means that there exists nowhere that ideal society of the philosophers 
marked by organic unity, accompanied by praiseworthy community of 
purpose, mutuality of sympathy, loyalty to public ends and concern for 
general welfare. Nobody can have much quarrel if the Hindu by way of 
analogy were to say that in every Society there are families and classes 
marked by exclusiveness, suspicion, and jealousy as to those without; 
bands of robbers, gangs, narrow cliques, trade unions. Employees’ 
Associations, Kartels, Chambers of Commerce and political parties. Some 
of these are held together by the interest and plunder and others while 
aspiring to serve the public do not hesitate to prey upon it. 

It may be conceded that everywhere de facto society whether in the 
past or in the present is not a single whole but a collection of small 
groups devoted to diverse purposes as their immediate and particular 
objectives. But the Hindu cannot take shelter under this analogy 
between the Hindu caste system and the Non-Hindu Class system and 
rest there as though there is nothing more to be said about the subject. 
The fact is there is a far bigger question which the Hindu has still to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


306 


306 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

face. He must take note of the fact that although every society consists of 
groups there are societies in which the groups are only non-social while 
there are societies in which the groups are anti-social. The difference 
between a society with the class system and a society with the caste 
system lies just in this namely the class system is merely non-social but 
the caste system is positively anti-soicial. 

It may be important to realize why in some societies the group system 
produces only non-social feeling and in some societies the group system 
produces anti-social feeling. No better explanation of this difference can 
be given than the one given by professor John Dewey. According to him 
every thing depends upon whether the groups are isolated or associated, 
whether there is reciprocity of interest between them or whether there 
is lack of reciprocity of interest. If the groups are associated, if there 
is a reciprocity of interest between them the feeling between them will 
be only non-social. If the groups are isolated, if there is no reciprocity 
between them the feeling between them will be anti-social. To quote 
Professor Dewey 1 : 

“The isolation and exclusiveness of a gang or clique brings its anti-social 
spirit into relief. But this same spirit is found wherever one group has 
interests ‘of its own’ which shut it out from full interaction with other 
groups, so that its prevailing purpose is the protection of what it has got, 
instead of reorganization and progress through wider relationships. It 
marks nations in their isolation from one another; families which seclude 
their domestic concerns as if they had no connection with a larger life; 
schools when separated from the interest of home and community; the 
divisions of rich and poor; learned and unlearned. The essential point 
is that isolation makes for rigidity and formal institutionalizing of life, 
for static and selfish ideals within the group.” 

The question to be asked is not whether there are groups in a Society 
or whether the Society is one single whole. The question to be asked is 
what degree of association, cooperative intercourse and interaction exists 
among the different groups; how numerous and varied are the interests 
which are consciously shared by them: how full and free is the interplay 
with other forms of Association? A society is not to be condemned as 
body because there are groups in it. It is to be condemned if the groups 
are isolated, each leading an exclusive life of its own. Because it is this 
isolation which produces the anti-social spirit which makes co-operative 
effort so impossible of achievement. 

This isolation among the classes is the work of Brahmanism. The 
principal steps taken by it was to abrogate the system of intermarriage 


l Democracy and Education p. 99 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


307 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 307 

and interdining that was prevalent among the four Varnas in olden times. 
This has already been discussed in an earlier section of this chapter. There is 
however one part of the story that remains to be told. I have said the Varna 
system had nothing to do with marriage. That males and females belonging to 
the different Varnas could marry and did marry. Law did not come in the way 
of inter-varna marriage. Social morality was not opposed to such marriages. 
Savarna marriage was neither required by law nor demanded by Society. All 
marriages between different Varnas — irrespective of the question whether 
the bride was of a higher Varna than the bride-groom or whether the bride- 
groom was of the higher Varna and the bride of the lower Varna — were valid. 
Indeed as Prof. Kane says the distinction between Anuloma and Pratiloma 
marriage was quite unknown and even the terms Anuloma and Pratiloma 
were not in existence. They are the creation of Brahmanism. Brahmanism 
put a stop to Pratiloma marriages i.e. marriages between women of a higher 
Varna and men of lower Varna. That was a step in the direction of closing 
the connection between the Varnas and creating in them an exclusive and 
anti-social spirit regarding one another. But while the inter-connecting gate 
of the Pratiloma marriage was closed the inter-connecting gate of Anuloma 
marriage had remained open. That was not closed. As pointed out in the 
section on graded inequality Anuloma marriage i.e. marriage between a 
male of the higher Varna and the female of the lower Varna was allowed 
by Brahmanism to continue. The gate of Anuloma marriage was not very 
respectable and was a one way gate only, still it was an interconnecting gate 
by which it was possible to prevent a complete isolation of the Varnas. But 
even here Brahmanism played what cannot but be called a dirty trick. To 
show how dirty the trick was it is necessary first to state the rules which 
prevailed for determining the status of the child. Under the rule existing from 
very ancient times the status of the child was determined by the Varna of 
the lather. The Varna of the mother was quite unimportant. The following 
illustrations will place the point beyond doubt: 


Father’s 

name 

Varna of 
father 

Mother’s 

Name 

Varna of 
mother 

Child’s 

name 

Varna of 
child 

1. Shantanu 

Kshatriya 

Ganga 

Shudra 

(Anamik) 

Bhishma 

Kshatriya 

2. Shantanu 

Kshatriya 

Matsyagandha 

Shudra 

(Fisher) 

Viehitra 

Virya 

Kshatriya 

3. Parashar 

Brahmin 

Matsyagandha 

Shudra 

(Fisher) 

Krishna- 

Dwaipayana 

Brahmin 

4. Vishwamitra 

Kshatriya 

Menaka 

(Apsara) 

Shakuntala 

Kshatriya 

5. Yayati 

Kshatriya 

Devayani 

Brahmin 

Yadu 

Kshatriya 

6. Yayati 

Kshatriya 

Sharmishta 

Asuri 

(Nonaryan) 

Druhya 

Kshatriya 

7. Jaratkaru 

Brahmin 

Jaratkari 

Nag. 

(Nonaryan) 

Asita 

Brahmin 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


308 


308 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The rule was known as the rule of Pitra Savarnya. It would be 
interesting to consider the effect of this rule of Pitra Savarnya on the 
Anuloma and Pratiloma systems of marriage. 

The effect on Pratiloma marriage would be that the children, of 
mothers of the higher Varnas would be dragged down to the level of 
the lower Varnas represented by their fathers. Its effect on Anuloma 
marriage would be just the contrary. The children of mothers of the 
lower Varnas would be raised up and absorbed in the higher Varnas 
of their fathers. 

Manu stopped Pratiloma marriages and thereby prevented the higher 
from being dragged to the status of the lower. However regrettable, not 
much damage was done by it so long as the Anuloma marriage and the 
rule of Pitra Savarnya continued in operation. The two together formed 
a very useful system. The Anuloma marriage maintained the inter- 
connection and the Pitra Savarnya rule made the higher classes quite 
composite in their make up. For they could not but help to be drawn 
from mothers of different Varnas. Brahmanism did not want to keep this 
gate of intercommunication between the Varnas open. It was bent on 
closing it. But it did it in a manner which is disreputable. The straight 
and honourable way was to stop Anuloma marriage. But Brahmanism 
did not do that. It allowed the system of Anuloma marriage to continue. 
What it did was to alter the rule of determining the status of the child. 
It replaced the rule of Pitra Savarnya by the rule of Matra Savarnya 
by which the status of the child came to be determined by the status 
of the mother. By this change marriage ceased to be that means of 
intersocial communication which it principally is. It relieved men of the 
higher Varna from the responsibility to their children simply because 
they were born of a mother of lower Varna. It made Anuloma marriage 
mere matter of sex. a humiliation and insult to the lower Varnas and 
a privilege to the higher classes to lawfully commit prostitution with 
women of the lower classes. And from a larger social point of view it 
brought the complete isolation among the Varnas which has been the 
bane of Hindu Society. Notwithstanding all this the Orthodox Hindu 
still believes that the caste system is an ideal system. But why talk 
about the orthodox Hindus. There are among enlightened politicians and 
historians. There are of course Indians both politicians and historians who 
vehemently deny that the Caste system comes in the way of nationalism. 
They presume that India is a nation and feel very much offended if 
anybody instead of speaking of the Indian Nation speaks of the people of 
India. This attitude is quite understandable. Most of the politicians and 
historians are Brahmins and cannot be expected to have the courage to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


309 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 309 

expose the misdeeds of their ancestors or admit the evils perpetrated by 
them. Ask any one the question, is India a nation, and all in a chorus say, 
‘yes.’ Ask for reasons, they will say that India is a nation firstly because 
India has a geographical unity of the country and secondly because of 
the fundamental unity of the culture. All this may be admitted for the 
sake of argument and yet it is true to say that to draw an inference 
from these facts that India is a nation is really to cherish a delusion. For 
what is a nation? A nation is not a country in the physical sense of the 
country whatever degree of geographical unity it may posses. A nation 
is not people synthesized by a common culture derived from common 
language, common religion or common race. To recall what I have said 
in another place “ Nationality is a subjective psychological feeling. It is 
a feeling of a corporate sentiment of oneness which makes those who are 
charged with it feel that they are kith and kin. This national feeling is 
a double edged feeling. It is at once a feeling of fellowship for one’s own 
kith and an anti-fellowship feeling for those who are not one’s own kith. 
It is a feeling of “ consciousness of kind” which binds together those who 
are within the limits of the kindred and severs them from those who 
are outside the limits of the kindred. It is a longing to belong to one’s 
own group and a longing not to belong to any other group. This is the 
essence of what is called a nationality and national feeling. This longing 
to belong to one’s own kindred as I said is a subjective psychological 
feeling and what is important to bear in mind is that the longing to 
belong to one’s own kindred is quite independent of geography, culture 
or economic or social conflict. There may be geographical unity and yet 
there may be no “longing to belong”. There may be no geographical unity 
and yet the feeling of longing to belong may be very intense. There may 
be cultural unity and yet there may be no longing to belong. There may 
be economical conflicts and class divisions and yet there may be an 
intense feeling of longing to belong. The point is that nationality is not 
primarily a matter of geography culture or” 

In the declinging 1 days of the Vedic Regime, the Shudras as well 
as women had come to occupy a very low position. The rising tide of 
Buddhism had brought about a great change in the status of both. 
To put it briefly a Shudra under the Buddhist regime could acquire 
property, learning and could even become a king. Nay he could even 
rise to the highest rung of the social ladder occupied by the Brahmin 
in the Vedic Regime. The Buddhist order of Bhikshus was counterpart 
of the Vedic order of Brahmins. The two orders, each within its own 

1 By declining days I mean the period since when the Brahmins started disturbing the 
balance of Chaturvaryna system by asserting their supremacy. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


310 


310 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

religious system were on a par in the matter of status and dignity. The 
Shudra could never aspire to be a Brahmin in the Vedic regime but he 
could become a Bhikshu and occupy the same status and dignity as did 
the Brahmin. For, while the Vedic order of Bramhins was closed to the 
Shudra, the Buddhist order of Bhikshus was open to him and many 
Shudras who could not become Brahmins under the Vedic Regime had 
become their peers by becoming Bhikshus under Buddhism. Similar 
change is noticeable in the case of women. Under the Buddhist regime she 
became a free person. Marriage did not make her a slave. For marriage 
under the Buddhist rule was a contract. Under the Buddhist Regime 
she could acquire property, she could acquire learning and what was 
unique, she could become a member of the Buddhist order of Nuns and 
reach the same status and dignity as a Brahmin. The elevation of the 
status of the Shudras and women was so much the result of the gospel 
of Buddhism that Buddhism was called by its enemies as the Shudra 
religion (i.e. the religion of the low classes). 

All this of course must have been very galling to the Brahmins. How 
very galling it must have been to them is shown by the vandallic fury 
with which Bramhanism after its triumph over Buddhism proceeded 
to bring about a complete demolition of the high status to which the 
Shudras and women had been elevated by the revolutionary changes 
effected by the vivifying gospel of Buddhism. 

Starting with this background one shudders at the inhumanity and 
cruelty of the laws made by Manu against the Shudras. I quote a few 
of them assembling them under certain general heads. 

Manu asks the householders of the Brahmana, Kshatriya and Vaishya 
Class : 

IV. 61. Let him not dwell in a country where the rulers are 

Shudra 

This cannot mean that Bramhana, Kashtriya and Vaishya should 
leave the country where Shudra is a ruler. It can only mean that if a 
Shudra becomes a king he should be killed. Not only a Shudra is not to 
be recognized as fit to be a king, he is not to be deemed as a respectable 
person. For Manu enacts that : — 

XI. 24. A Bramhin shall never beg from a Shudra property for 

(performing) a sacrifice i.e. for religious purposes. 

All marriage ties with the Shudra were proscribed. A marriage with 
a woman belonging to any of the three higher classes was forbidden. 
A Shudra was not to have any connection with a woman of the higher 
classes and an act of adultery committed by a Shudra with her was 
declared by Manu to be an offence involving capital punishment. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


311 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 311 

VIII. 374. A Shudra who has an intercourse with a woman of the 
higher caste guarded 1 or unguarded, shall be punished in the following 
manner; if she was unguarded, he loses the offending part. If she was 
guarded then he should be put to death and his property confiscated. 

Manu insists that a Shudra shall be servile, unfit for office, without 
education, without property and as a contemptible person, his person 
and property shall always be liable to be conscripted. 

As to office Manu prescribes. 

VIII 20. A Bramhana who is only a Brahmana by descent i.e. one has 
neither studied nor performed any other act required by the Vedas may. 
at the king’s pleasure, interpret the law to him i.e. act as the Judge, 
but never a Shudra (however learned he may be). 

VIII. 21. The Kingdom of that monarch who looks on while a Shudra 
settles the law will sink low like a cow in a morass. 

VIII. 272. If a Shudra arrogantly presumes to preach religion to 
Bramhins the King shall have poured burning oil in his mouth and ears. 

In olden times the study of the Vedas stood for education. Manu 
declare that the study of the Vedas was not a matter of right but that 
it was a matter of privilege. Manu deprived the Shudra of the right to 
study Veda. He made it a privilege of the three higher classes. Not only 
did he debar the Shudra from the study of the Vedas but he enacted 
penalties against those who might help the Shudra to acquire knowledge 
of the Veda. To a person who is previleged to study the Vedas, Manu 
ordains that : 

IV. 99. He must never read the Vedas., .in the presence of the Shudras. 
and prescribes that : — 

III. 156. He who instructs Shudra pupils and he whose teacher is a 
Shudra shall become disqualified for being invited to Shradha. 

Manu’s successor went much beyond him in the cruelty of their 
punishment of the Shudra for studying the Veda. For instance Katyayana 
lays down that if a Shudra overheard the Veda or ventured to utter a 
word of the Veda, the King shall cut his tongue in twain and put hot 
molten lead in his ears. 

As to property Manu is both ruthless and shameless. According to 
the Code of Manu : 

X. 129. No superfluous collection of wealth must be made by a Shudra, 
even though he has power to make it since a servile man, who has 
amassed riches, becomes proud, and. by his insolence or neglect, gives 
pain to Bramhans. 

^Guarded means under the protection of relation, Unguarded means living alone. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


312 


312 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The reason for the rule is more revolting than the rule itself. Manu 
was of course not sure that the prohibitory injunction will be enough 
to prevent the Shudra from acquiring wealth. To leave no room for the 
Shudra to give offence to the Bramhins by his accumulation of wealth 
Manu added another section to his code whereby he declared that : 

VIII. 417. A Bramhana may seize without hesitation if he be in 
distress for his subsistence, the goods of his Shudra. 

Not only is the property of a Shudra liable to conscription but the 
labour of the Shudra, Manu declares, is liable to conscription. Compare 
the following provision in Manu : 

VIII. 413. A Bramhana may compel a Shudra, whether bought or 
unbought to do servile work; for he is created by the creator to be the 
slave of a Bramhana. 

A Shudra was required by Manu to be servile in his speech. How very 
servile he must be can be seen from the following provisions in Manu : — 

VIII. 270. A Shudra who insults a twiceborn man with gross invective, 
shall have his tongue cut out; for he is of low origin. 

VIII. 271. If he mentions the names and castes of the (twiceborn) 
with contumely, an iron nail, ten fingers long, shall be thrust red hot 
into his mouth. 

Manu’s object was to make the Shudra not merely a servile person 
but an altogether contemptible person. Manu will not allow a Shudra 
the comfort of having a high sounding name. Had Manu not been there 
to furnish incontrovertible proof it would be difficult to believe that 
Bramanism could have been so relentless and pitiless in its persecution 
of the Shudra. Observe Manu’s law as to the names that the different 
classes can give to their children. 

II. 31. Let the first part of a Brahman’s name denote something 
auspicious, a Kshatriya’s be connected with power, and a Vaishya’s with 
wealth, but a Shudra’s express something contemptible. 

II. 32. The second part of a Bramhan’s name shall be a word implying 
happiness, of a Kshatriya’s a word implying protection, of a Vaisya’s a 
term expressive of thriving and of a Shudra’s an expression denoting 
service. 

The basis of all these inhuman laws is the theory enunciated by Manu 
regarding the Shudra. At the outset of his Code, Manu takes care to 
assert it emphatically and without blushing. He says : 

I. 91. One occupation only, the Lord prescribed to the Shudra, to 
serve meekly these other three castes (namely Bramhin, Kshatriya and 
Vaishya). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


313 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 313 

Holding that the Shudra was born to be servile, Manu made his laws 
accordingly so as to compel him to remain servile. In the Buddhist 
regime a Shudra could aspire to be a judge, a priest and even a King, 
the highest status that he could ever aspire to. Compare with this the 
ideal that Manu places before the Shudra and one can get an idea of 
what fate was to be under Brahmanism : 

X. 121. If a Shudra, (unable to subsist by serving Brahmanas), 
seeks a livelihood, he may serve Kshartiyas, or he may also seek to 
maintain himself by attending on a wealthy Vaishya. 

X. 122. But let a (Shudra) serve Brahmanas, either for the sake of 
heaven, or with a view to both (this life and the next); for he who is 
called the servant of a Brahmana thereby gains all his ends. 

X. 123. The service of Brahmanas alone is declared (to be) an 
excellent occupation for a Shudra; for whatever else besides this he 
may perform will bear him no fruit. 

X. 124. They must allot to him out of their own family (property) a 
suitable maintenance, after considering his ability, his industry, and 
the number of those whom he is bound to support. 

X. 125. The remnants of their food must be given to him, as well 
as their old household furniture. 

Manu can hardly be said to be more tender to women than he was to 
the Shudra. He starts with a low opinion of women. Manu proclaims : 

II. 213. It is the nature of women to seduce men in this (world); for 
that reason the wise are never unguarded in (the company of) females. 

II. 214. For women are able to lead astray in (this) world not only 
a fool, but even a learned man, and (to make) him a slave of desire 
and anger. 

II. 215. One should not sit in a lonely place with one’s mother 
sister or daughter; for the senses are powerful, and master even a 
learned man. 

IX. 14. Women do not care for beauty, nor is their attention fixed on 
age; (thinking), ‘(It is enough that) he is a man ’, they give themselves 
to the handsome and to the ugly. 

IX. 15. Through their passion for men, through their mutable temper, 
through their natural heartlessness, they become disloyal towards 
their husbands, however carefully they may be guarded in this (world). 

IX. 16. Knowing their disposition, which the Lord of creatures laid in 
them at the creation, to be such, (every) man should most strenuously 
exert himself to guard them. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


314 


314 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

IX. 17. (When creating them) Manu allotted to women (a love of 
their) bed, (of their) seat and (of) ornament, impure desires, wrath, 
dishonesty, malice, and bad conduct. 

The laws of Manu against women are of a piece with this view. 
Women are not to be free under any circumstances. In the opinion of 
Manu : — 

IX. 2. Day and night women must be kept in dependence by the 
males (of) their (families), and, if they attach themselves to sensual 
enjoyments, they must be kept under one’s control. 

IX. 3. Her father protects (her) in childhood, her husband protects 
(her) in youth, and her sons protect (her) in old age; a woman is never 
fit for independence. 

IX. 5. Women must particularly be gurded against evil inclinations, 
however trifling (they may appear); for, if they are not guarded, they 
will bring sorrow on two families. 

IX. 6. Considering that the highest duty of all castes, even weak 
husbands (must) strive to guard their wives. 

V. 147. By a girl, by a young woman, or even by an aged one, 
nothing must be done independently, even in her own house. 

V. 148. In childhood a female must be subject to her father, in 
youth to her husband, when her lord is dead to her sons; a woman 
must never be independent. 

V. 149. She must not seek to separate herself from her father, 
husband, or sons; by leaving them she would make both (her own 
and her husband’s) families contemptible. Woman is not to have a 
right to divorce. 

IX. 45. The husband is declared to be one with the wife, which 
means that there could be no separation once a woman is married. 
Many Hindus stop here as though this is the whole story regarding 
Manu’s law of divorce and keep on idolizing it by comforting their 
conscience by holding out the view that Manu regarded marriage as 
sacrament and therefore did not allow divorce. This of course is far 
from the truth. His law against divorce had a very different motive. It 
was not to tie up a man to a woman but it was to tie up the woman 
to a man and to leave the man free. For Manu does not prevent a 
man for giving up his wife. Indeed he not only allows him to abandon 
his wife but he also permits him to sell her. But what he does is to 
prevent the wife from becoming free. See what Manu Says : 

IX. 46. Neither by sale nor by repudiation is a wife released from 
her husband. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


315 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 315 

The meaning is that a wife, sold or repudiated by her husband, can never 
become the legitimate wife of another who may have bought or received 
her after she was repudiated. If this is not monstrous nothing can be. But 
Manu was not worried by considerations of justice or injustice of his laws. 
He wanted to deprive women of the freedom she had under the Buddhistic 
regime. He knew, by her misuse of her liberty, by her willingness to marry 
the Shudra that the system of the gradation of the Varna had been destroyed. 
Manu was outraged by her license and in putting a stop to it he deprived 
her of her liberty. 

A wife was reduced by Manu to the level of a slave in the matter of 
property. 

IX. 146. A wife, a son, and a slave, these three are declared to have no 
property; the wealth which they earn is (acquired) for him to whom they belong. 

When she becomes a widow Manu allows her maintenance if her husband 
was joint and a widow’s estate in the property of her husband if he was 
separate from his family. But Manu never allows her to have any dominion 
over property. 

A woman under the laws of Manu is subject to corporal punishment and 
Manu allows the husband the right to beat his wife. 

VIII. 299. A wife, a son, a slave, a pupil, and a younger brother of the full 
blood, who have committed faults, may be beaten with a rope or a split bamboo. 

In other matters woman was reduced by Manu to the same position as 
the Shudra. 

The study of the Veda was forbidden to her by Manu as it was to the 
Shudra. 

II. 66. Even for a woman the performance of the Sanskaras are necessary 
and they should be performed. But they should, be performed without uttering 
the Veda Mantras. 

IX. 18. Women have no right to study the Vedas. That is why their Sanskars 
are performed without Veda Mantras. Women have no knowledge of religion 
because they have no right to know the Vedas. The uttering of the Veda 
Mantras is useful for removing sin. As women cannot utter the Veda Mantras 
they are as unclean as untruth is. 

Offering sacrifices according to Bramhanism formed the very soul of 
religion. Yet Manu will not allow women to perform them. Manu ordains 
that : — 

XI. 36. A woman shall not perform the daily sacrifices prescribed by the Vedas. 

XI. 37. If she does it she will go to hell. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


316 


316 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

To disable her from performing such sacrifices Manu prevents her from 
getting the aid and services of a Bramhin priest. 

IV. 205. A Bramhan must never eat food given at a sacrifice performed by 
a woman. 

IV. 206. Sacrifices performed by women are inauspicious and not acceptable 
to God. They should therefore be avoided. 

Woman was not to have any intellectual persuits and nor free will nor 
freedom of thought. She was not to join any heretical sect such as Buddhism. 
If she continues to adhere to it, till death she is not to be given the libation 
of water as is done in the case of all dead. 

Finally a word regarding the ideal of life, Manu has sought to place before 
a woman. It had better be stated in his own words : 

V. 151. Him to whom her father may give her, or her brother with the 
father’s permission, she shall obey as long as he lives and when he is dead, 
she must not insult his memory. 

V. 154. Though destitute of virtue, or seeking pleasure elsewhere, or devoid 
of good qualities, yet a husband must be constantly worshipped as a god by a 
faithful wife. 

V. 155. No sacrifice, no vow, no fast must be performed by women, apart 
from their husbands; if a wife obeys her husband, she will for that reason alone 
be exalted in heaven. 

Then comes the choicest texts which forms the pith and the marrow of 
this ideal which Manu prescribes for the women : 

V. 153. The husband who wedded her with sacred Mantras, is always a 
source of happiness to his wife, both in season and out of season, in this world 
and in the next. 

V. 150. She must always be cheerful, clever in the management of her 
household affairs, careful in cleaning her utensils, and economical in expenditure. 

This the Hindus regard as a very lofty ideal for a woman!!! 

The severity of these laws against Shudras and women show that the 
phenomenal rise of these classes during the Buddhist regime had not only 
offended the Brahmins but had become intolerable to them. It was a complete 
reversal of their sacred social order from top to bottom. The first had become 
last and the last had become first. The laws of Manu also explain, the 
determined way in which the Brahmins proceeded to use their political power 
to degrade the Shudras and the women to their old status. The triumphant 
Bramhanism began its onslaught on both the Shudras and the women in 
pursuit of the old ideal namely servility and Bramhanism did succeed in 
making the Shudras and women the servile classes, Shudras the serfs to the 
three higher classes and women the serfs to their husbands. Of the black 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


317 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 317 

deeds committed by Brahmanism after its triumph over Buddhism this 
one is the blackest. There is no parallel in history for so foul deeds of 
degradation committed by a class of usurpers in the interest of class 
domination. The collosal character of this deed of degradation perpetrated 
by Barahmanism is unfortunately not fully realized. It is concealed by 
those small monosyllablic words, Stri and Shudra. Let those who wish 
to get an idea of the enormity of their deed think, of the numbers that 
lie behind these two terms. What part of the population do they apply 
to ? The woman represents one half of the population. Of the balance 
the Shudra represents not less than two third. The two together make 
up about 75% of the total population. It is this huge mass of people 
that has been doomed by Brahmanism to eternal servility and eternal 
degradation. It is because of the collosal scale of degradation whereby 
75% of her people were deprived of their right to life, liberty and persuit 
of happiness that India became a decaying if not a dead nation. 

The principle of graded inequality runs through the whole of the Manu 
Smriti. There is no department of life in which he has not introduced his 
principle ,of graded inequality. For a complete and thorough exposition 
of it, it would be necessary to reproduce the whole of Manu Smriti. I 
will take only a few departments to illustrate how in the hands of Manu 
the principle of graded inequality became imbedded in the social life. 

Take the field of marriage. Observe the rule of Manu : — 

III. 13. It is declared that a Shudra woman alone (can be) the wife of 
a Shudra, she and one of his own caste (the wives) of a Vaishya, those 
two and one of his own caste the wives of a Kshatriya, those three and 
one of his own caste (the wives of a Bramhan). 

Take the rules of Manu regarding the treatment of guests : — 

III. 110. But a Kshatriya (who comes) to the house of a Brahmana is 
not called a guest (atithi), nor a Vaisya, nor a Shudra, nor a personal 
friend, nor a relative, nor the teacher. 

III. 111. But if Kshatriya comes to the house of a Brahmana in the 
manner of a guest, (the house-holder) may feed him according to his 
desire, after, the above mentioned Brahmanas have eaten. 

III. 112. Even a Vaisya and a Shudra who have approached his house 
in the manner of guests, he may allow to eat with his servants, showing 
(thereby) his compassionate disposition. 

In the house of a Brahmana, nobody except a Brahmin is to have 
the honour of being a guest. 1 If the Kshatriya comes in the manner 

1 The word guest is used by Manu in a technical sense and means a Bramhana who stays 
one night only see III. 102. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


318 


318 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of a guest to the house of a Brahmin he is to be fed after all the Brahmins 
are fed and if the Vaishyas and Shudras come in the manner of guests 
they are to be fed after everybody is fed and only in the company of 
servants. 

Take the rules of Manu regarding Sanskaras: 

X. 126. A Shudra has no right to receive the sacraments. 

X. 68. The law prescribes that neither of the two (that is those who 
belong to mixed castes) shall receive the sacraments the first being 
excluded on account of lowness of his origin of his parents was against 
the order of the castes. 

II. 66. The whole series 1 of sacraments must be performed for females 
also in order to sanctify the body at the proper time and in the proper 
order, but without the recitaion of sacred Vedic Mantras. 

Manu further lays down that: 

VI. 1. A twice born Snataka, who has thus lived according to the law 
in the order of householders, may, taking a firm resolution and keeping 
his organs in subjection, dwell in the forest, duly (observing the rules 
given below). 

VI. 33. But having thus passed the third part of (a man’s natural term 
of) life in the forest, he may live as an ascetic during the fourth part 
of his existence, after abandoning all attanchment to worldly objects. 

Even in law Manu introduces the principle of graded inequality. To 
take only two illustrations, the law of defamation, abuse and the law 
of assault: 

VIII. 267. A Kshatriya having defamed a Brahmana, shall be fined 
one hundred (panas); A Vaisya one hundred and fifty or two hundred; 
a Shudra shall suffer corporal punishment. 

VIII. 268. A Brahamna shall be fined fifty (panas) for defaming a 
Kshatriya; in (the case of) a Vaisya the fine shall be twenty five (panas); 
in (the case of) a Shudra twelve. 

VIII. 269. For offences of twice born men against those of equal caste 
(varna, the fine shall be) also twelve (panas) for speeches which ought 
not to be uttered, that (and every fine shall be) double. 

VIII. 276. (For mutual abuse) by a Brahmana and a Kshatriya a fine 
must be imposed by a discerning (king), on the Brahmana the lowest 
agreement, but on the Kshatriya the middlemost. 

VIII. 277. A Vaisya and a Shudra must be punished exactly in the 
same manner according to their respective castes, but the tongue (of 
the Shudra) shall not be cut out; that is the decision. 

1 Except Upanayan which is forbidden for women. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


319 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 319 

VIII. 279. With whatever limb a man of a low caste does hurt to (a 
man of the three) highest (castes), even that limb shall be cut off; that 
is the teaching of Manu. 

VIII. 280. He who raises his hand or a stick, shall have his hand 
cut off; he who in anger kicks with his foot, shall have his foot cut off. 

Everywhere is the principle of graded inequality. So ingrained it had 
become in the social system that the successors of Manu were careful to 
introduce it where he had failed to give effect to it. For instance Manu 
had had recognized the system of slavery. But had failed to prescribe 
whether the system of slavery was or was not subject to the principle 
of graded order of insubordination. 

Lest it should be understood that the law of graded inequality did 
not apply to slavery and that a Brahmin may be a slave of the Shudra, 
Yajnavalkya at once proceeds to clear the doubt. He expressly laid down 
that: — 

“Slavery is in the descending order of the Varnas and not in the 
ascending order” (XIV. 183). 

Vijnaneshwar in his commentary on Yajnavalkya makes it concrete 
by his illustrations when he says : 

“Of the Varnas such as the Brahmana and the rest, a state of slavery 
shall exist Anulomyena, in the descending order. Thus, of a Brahmana, a 
Kshatriya and the rest may become a slave; of a Kshatriya, the Vaishya 
and the Shudra; and of a Vaishya, Shudra, thus the state of slavery 
shall operate in the descending order.” 

Stated in the language of equality and inequality, this means that 
the Brahmin is the highest because he can be the slave of nobody but 
is entitled to keep a person of any class as his slave. The Shudra is the 
lowest because everybody can keep him as his slave but he can keep no 
one as his slave except a Shudra. The place assigned to the Kshatriya 
and the Vaishya introduces the system of graded inequality. A Kshatriya 
while he is inferior to the Brahmin he can be the slave of the Brahmin. 
While he is yet superior to the Vaishyas and the Shudras because he 
can keep them as his slaves; the Vaishyas and the Shudras have no 
right to keep a Kshartiya as his slave. Similarly a Vaishya while he is 
inferior to the Bramhins and the Kshatriyas, because they can keep him 
as their slave and he cannot keep any one of them as his slave, he is 
proud that he is at least superior to the Shudra because he can keep the 
Shudra as his slave while Shudra cannot keep the Vaishya as his slave. 

Such is the principle of graded inequality which Bramhanism 
injected into the bone and the marrow of the people. Nothing worse 
to paralyze society to overthrow inequity could have been done. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


320 


320 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Although its effects have not been clearly noticed there can be no doubt 
that because of it the Hindus have been stricken with palsy, f Students of 
social organization have been content with noting the difference between 
equality and inequality. None have realized that in addition to equality 
and inequality there is such a thing as graded inequality. Yet inequality 
is not half so dangerous as graded inequality. Inequality carried within 
itself the seeds of its own destruction. Inequality does not last long. 
Under pure and simple inequality two things happen. It creates general 
discontent which forms the seed of revolution. Secondly it makes the 
sufferers combine against a common foe and on a common grievance. 
But the nature and circumstances of the system of graded inequality 
leave no room for either of these two things to happen. The system of 
graded inequality prevents the rise of general discontent against inequity, 
ft cannot therefore become the storm centre of revolution. Secondly 
the sufferers under inequality becoming unequal both in terms of the 
benefit and the burden there is no possibility of a general combination 
of all classes to overthrow the inequity. To make the thing concrete the 
Brahmanic law of marriage is full of inequity. The right of Brahmana 
to take a woman from the classes below him but not to give a woman 
to them is in inequity. But the Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra will not 
combine to destroy it. The Kshatriya resents this right of the Brahmana. 
But he will not combine with Vaishya or the Shudra and that for two 
reasons. Firstly because he is satisfied that if the Brahman has the 
right to take the right of three communities, the Kshatriya has the 
right to appropriate the women of two communities. He does not suffer 
so much as the other two. Secondly if he joins in a general revolution 
against this marriage — inequity in one way he will rise to the level of 
the Bramhins but in another way all will be equal which to him means 
that the Vaishyas and the Shudras will rise to his level i.e. they will 
claim Kshatriya women-which means he will fall to their level. Take 
any other inequity and think of a revolt against it. The same social 
psychology will show that a general rebellion against it is impossible. 

One of the reasons why there has been no revolution against 
Brahmanism and its inequities is due entirely to the principle of graded 
inequality. If is a system of permitting a share in the spoils with a view 
to enlist them to support the spoils system. It is a system full of low 
cunning which man could have invented to perpetuate inequity and to 
profit by it. For it is nothing else but inviting people to share in inequity 
in order that they may all be supporters of inequity. 

There now remains to lift the curtain from the last act of this drama 
of Bramhanism. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


321 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 321 

Bramhanism inherited from the Vedic past that system of Chaturvarna. 
The system of Chaturvarna which the Hindus regard as the unique creation 
of their Aryan ancestors is in no sense unique. There is nothing original 
about it. The whole ancient world had stumbled into it. The Egyptians 
had it and the ancient Persians had it. Plato was so convinced about its 
excellence that he presented it as ideal form of social organization. The 
ideal of the Chaturvarna is faulty. The lumping together of individuals 
into a few sharply marked off classes is a very superficial view of man 
and his powers. The Ancient Aryans as well as Plato had no conception 
of the uniqueness of every individual, of his incommensurability with 
others and of each individual forming a class of his own. They had no 
recognition of the infinite diversity of active tendencies and combination of 
tendencies of which an individual is capable. To them there were types of 
faculties or powers in the individual constitution and all that is necessary 
for social organization is to classify them. All this is demonstrably wrong. 
Modern science has shown that lumping together of individuals into a 
few sharply marked off classes each confined to one particular sphere 
does injustice both to the individual and to Society. The stratification 
of Society by classes and occupations is incompatible with the fullest , 
utilization of the qualities which is so necessary for social advancement 
and is also incompatible with the safety and security of the individual 
as well as of Society in general . 1 

There is another mistake which the Ancient Hindus including Plato, 
made. There is probably some truth in saying that there is among 
human beings a dimorphism or polyformism in human beings as there 
is among insects, though in the former it is only psychological while 
in the latter it is both physical as well as psychlolgical. But assuming 
that there is a thing psychological dimorphism or polyformism among 
human beings, it is wrong to separate them into those who are born 
to do one thing and others to do another, some born to command i.e. 
to be masters and some born to obey i.e. to be slaves. It is wrong to 
suppose that in a given person some qualities are present and others 
are absent. On the contrary the truth is that all qualities are present 
in every person and this truth is not diminished in any way by that, 
some tendency predominates to the extent of being the only one that is 
apparent. So well established is this truth that a tendency which may 
be dominant in a man at one time may be quite different from and even 
the direct opposite of the tendency that may be dominant at another 
time. As Prof. Bergson 2 in speaking of the Nietsche’s false antithesis of 
‘men’ and ‘slaves’ observes : 

1 For further consideration of this subject see my tract on “Annihilation of Caste.” 

2 “Two sources of Morality”. (Holt), p. 267. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


322 


322 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“We have a clear vision of this (falsity) in times of revolution, 

Unassuming citizens, upto that moment humble and obedient, wake up 

one fine day with pretentions to be leaders of men”. 

The cases of Mussolini and Hitler are a complete disproof of the theory 
of the Aryans and of Plato. 

This Vedic system of Chaturvarna, far from being an ideal system 
was made positively worse by the changes which Bramhanism made and 
which have already been described. Every one of them was mischievous 
in character is beyond question. The Buddhist order of Bhikshus and the 
Vedic order of Brahmins were designed to serve the same purpose. They 
formed the elite of their society whose function was to lead and guide 
society along the right road. Although designed to discharge the same 
function the Budhist Bhikshu was better placed to discharge it than 
was the Bramhin. That is because Buddha recognized one thing which 
nobody either before him or after him has done. Buddha realized that 
lor a person to give a true lead to Society and be its trustworthy guide 
he must be intellectually free and further, which is more important, 
to be intellectually free he must not have private property. An elite 
charged with the care of his private property must fail to discharge 
his duty of leading and guiding Society along the right road. Buddha 
therefore took care to include in the Code of discipline for the Bhikshus 
a rule prohibiting a Bhikshu from holding private property. In the Vedic 
order of Bramhins there was no such prohibition. A Bramhin was free 
to hold property. This difference produced a profound difference on the 
character and outlook of the Buddhist Bhikshu and the Vedic Bramhin. 
The Bhikshus formed an intellectual class. The Bramhins formed on the 
other hand merely an educated class. There is a great difference between 
an intellectual class and an educated class. An intellectual class has no 
limitations arising out of any affiliations to any class or to any interest. 
An educated Class on the other hand is not an intellectual class although 
it has cultivated its intellect. The reason is that its range of vision and 
its sympathy to a new ideology is circumscribed by its being identified 
with the interest of the class with which it is affiliated. 

The Bramhins from the very beginning therefore were inclined to be 
a purely educated class, enlightened but selfish. This evil in the Vedic 
order of Bramhins was extreme by the changes made in the old Vedic 
System. The right of the Brahmins to rule and the grant of special 
privileges and immunities made them more selfish, and induced in them 
the desire to use their education not for the advancement of learning but 
for the use of their community and against the advancement of society. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


323 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 323 

All their energy and their education has been spent in maintaining 
their own privileges against the good of the public. It has been the boast 
of many Hindu authors that the civilization of India is the most ancient 
civilization in the world. They will insist that there was no branch of 
knowledge in which their ancestors were not the pioneers. Open a book 
like “The Positive Background of Hindu Sociology” by Prof. Benoy Kumar 
Sarkar, or a book like “The Positive Sciences of the Ancient Hindus” by 
Dr. Brajendranath Seal one is overwhelmed with data touching upon the 
knowledge their ancestors had about various scientific subjects. From 
these books it would appear that the ancient Indians knew astronomy, 
astrology, biology, chemistry, mathematics, Medicine, minerology. Physics 
and in the view of the mass of people even aviation. All this may be very 
true. The important question is now how the ancient Indians discovered 
these positive sciences. The important question is why did the ancient 
Indians cease to make any progress in the sciences in which they were the 
pioneers? This sudden arrest in the progress of science in ancient India 
is as astounding as it is deplorable. In the scientific world India occupies 
a position which even if it be first among the primitive is certainly last 
among the civilized nation. How did it happen that a people who began 
the work of scientific progress stopped, halted on the way, left in its 
incohate and incomplete condition ? This is a question that needs to be 
considered and answered, not what the ancient Indians knew. 

There is only one answer to the question and it is a very simple 
answer. In ancient India the Bramhins were the only educated class. They 
were also the Class which was claiming to be above all others. Buddha 
disputed their claim for supremacy and declared a war on the Brahmins. 
The Brahmins acted as an Educated Class — as distinguished from an 
intellectual class — would act under the circumstances. It abandoned all 
pursuits and engaged itself in defending the claim of supremacy and the 
social, economic and political interests of its class. Instead of writing 
books on Science, the Brahmins undertook to write Smritis. Here is 
an explanation why the progress of science in India became arrested. 
Brahmins found it more important and more imperative to write Smritis 
to repel the Buddhist doctrine of social equality. 

How many Smritis did the Brahmins write ? 

Mr. Kane a great authority on the Smriti literature has computed 
their number to be 128. And what for ? The Smritis are called 
lawbooks which of course hide their nature. They are really treatises 
expounding the supremacy of the Brahmins and their rights to special 
privileges. The defence of Bramhanism was more important than the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


324 


324 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

progress of science. Bramhanism not only defended its previleges but set 
about extending them in a manner that would cover every descent man 
with shame. The Brahmins started particularly to expand the meaning 
of certain privileges granted to them by Manu. 

Manu had given the Bramhins the right to dana, gift. The dana 
was always intended to be money or chattel. But in course of time the 
concept of dana was expanded so as to include the gift of a woman which 
a Brahmin could keep as his mistress or who could be released by the 
Bramhin on commutation 1 of money payment. 

Manu designated the Bramhins as Bhu-devas, lords of the Earth. The 
Bramhins enlarged the scope of this statement and began to claim the 
right to sexual intercourse with women of other classes. Even queens 
were not exempt from this claim. Ludovico Di Varthema who came to 
India as a traveller in about 1502 A.D. records the following about the 
Brahmins of Calicut: 

“It is a proper, and the same time pleasant thing to know who these 
Brahmins are. You must know that they are the chief persons of the 
faith, as priests are among us. And when the King takes a wife, he 
selects the most worthy and the most honoured of these Brahamins 
and makes him sleep the first night with his wife, in order that he 
may deflower her. ” 2 . 

Similarly Hamilton 3 another writer says: 

“When the Samorin marries, he must not cohabit with his bride till 
the Nambourie (Nambudari Brahmin), or chief priest, has enjoyed her, 
and if he pleases, he may have three nights of her company, because 
the first fruits of her nuptials must be an holy oblation to the god she 
worships.” 

In the Bombay Presidency the priests of the Vaishnava sect claimed the 
right to deflower the women of their sect. This gave rise to the famous 
Maharaja Libel case brought by the chief priest of the Sect against one 
Karosondas Mulji in the High Court of Bombay in the year 1869 which 
shows that the right to claim the benefit of the first night was certainly 
effective till then. 

When such a right to sexual cohabitation for the first night could be 
extended against the generality of the lower classes the Brahmins did 
not hesitate to extend it. This they did particularly in Malabar. There, 
Manu designated the Brahmins as Bhu-devas, lords of the earth. The 
Brahmins enlarged the scope of this statement and began to claim the 

1 1 remember reading the report of case in which a Brahmin who had taken a married wife 
as Dana refused to release her even though communication was offered by her husband. 

2 “The Travels of Ludovico Di Varthema” (Pub. Hakyt Society) Page 141. Varthema adds 
Do not imagine that the Brahmin goes willingly to perform this operation. The King is 
even obliged to pay him four hundred or five hudndred ducats. 

3 New Account of the East Indies (1744) Vol. I. page 310. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


325 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 325 

right of promiscuous sexual intercourse with the women folk of the other 
Classes. This happened particularly in Malabar. There 1 

“The Brahman castes follow the Makatyam System that is the system 
by which the child belongs to its father’s family. They contract, within 
their own caste regular marriages, with all the ordinary legal and religious 
sanctions and incidents. But the Brahmin men are also in the habit 
of entering into Sambandhan-Unions with women of the lower castes.” 

This is not all. Observe further what the writer has to say: 

“Neither party to a Sambadhan Unions becomes thereby a member of 
the other family; and the offspring of the Union belong to their mothers 
tharwad (family) and have no sort of claim, so far as the law goes, to a 
share of their father’s property or to maintenance therefrom.” 

Speaking of the origin of this practice the author of the Gazetteer 
observes that the origin of this institution: 

“ Is found in the claim of the Bhu-devas ” or “ Earth Gods” (that 
the Brahmanas) and on a lower plain of the Kshatriyas or the ruling 
classes, to the first fruits of lower Caste Womanhood, a right akin to 
the medieval droit de Seigneurie.” 

It is an understatement to say that it is only a right to first fruits 
as the ‘right to the first night’ was called in the middle ages in Europe. 
It is more than that. It is a general right of the Brahmin against the 
lower caste to claim any woman of that class for mere prostitution, for 
the mere satisfaction of sexual appetite, without burdening the Brahmin 
to any of the obligations of marriage. 

Such were the rights which the Brahmins the spiritual precepts 
claimed against the laity!! The Borgese Popes have been run down in 
history as the most debauched race of spiritual preceptors who ascended 
the throne of Peter. One wonders whether they were really worse than 
the Brahmins of India. 

A purely intellectual Class, free to consider general good and having 
no interest of a class to consider, such as the one contemplated by 
Buddha is not to be had anywhere. For the limitations resulting from 
property on the freedom of intellect of the elite have not been generally 
recognized until very recently. But this want of an intellectual class has 
been made good in other countries by the fact that in those countries 
each Strata of Society has its educated class. There is safety, if no 
definite guidance, in the multiplicity of views expressed by different 
educated classes drawn from different strata of society. In such a 
multiplicity of views there is no danger of Society being misguided or 
1 Gazetteer of Malabar and Anjengo District by Mr. C. A. Innes Vol. I. p. 95 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


326 


326 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

misdirected by the views of one single educated class drawn from 
one single class of society and which is naturally bound to place the 
interest of its class before the interests of the country. By the change 
made by Brahmanism India ceased to have safe and sure guidance of 
an intellectual class. But what is worse is that the Hindus lost the 
safety and security which other, peoples have and which arises from 
the multiplicity of views expressed by various educated classes drawn 
from different strata of Society. 

By the denial of education to the Shudras, by diverting the Kshatrryas 
to military persuits, and the Vaishyas to trade and by reserving education 
to themselves the Brahmins alone could become the educated class — free 
to misdirect and misguide the whole society. By converting Varna into 
Caste they declared that mere birth was a real and final measure of 
the worth of a man. Caste and Graded inequality made disunity and 
discord a matter of course. 

All this disfigurement of the original Varna system would have 
been tolerable if it had remained a mere matter of social practice. But 
Brahmanism was not content to leave the matter there. It wanted to 
give the Chaturvarna in its changed and perverted form the force of 
law. This new Chaturvarna the making of Brahmanism occupies in the 
Manu Smriti as the Law of Persons and the Law of Family. Nobody 
can make a mistake about it. Manu made it an offence for a person of 
a lower Caste to arrogate to himself the status of a higher Caste or to 
pass off as a member of the higher Caste. 

X. 96. A man of low caste who through covetousness lives by the 
occupations of a higher one, the king shall deprive of his property and 
banish. 

XI. 56. Falsely attributing to oneself high birth, giving information 
to the king (regarding a crime), and falsely accusing one’s teacher, (are 
offences) equal to slaying a Brahmana. 

Here there are two offences, General Impersonation (X. 96) and 
impersonation by the Shudra (XI 56). Note also the punishments how 
severe they are. For the first the punishment is confiscation of property 
and banishment. For the second the punishment is the same as the 
punishment for causing the death of a Brahmin. 

The offence of personation is not unknown in modern jurisprudence 
and the Indian Penal Code recognizes it in section 419. But what is the 
punishment the Indian Penal Code prescribes for cheating by personation? 
Fine, and if imprisonment, then 3 years or both. Manu must be turning 
in his grave to find the British Government make so light of his law 
of Caste. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


327 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 327 

Manu next proceeds to direct the king that he should execute this law. 
In the first place he appeals to the King in the name of his pious duty: 

VIII. 172. By preventing the confusion of Castes the power 

of the King grows, and he prospers in this world and after death. 

Manu perhaps knows that the law relating to the confusion of Varna 
may not be quite agreeable to the conscience of the king and he avoids 
enforcement. Consequently Manu tells the King how in the matter of 
the execution of the laws the King should act: 

VIII. 177. Therefore let the King not heeding his own likes and dislikes 
behave exactly like Yama. 

i.e. he should be as impartial as Yama the Judge of the Dead. 

Manu however does not wish to leave the matter to the King as a 
mere matter of pious duty. Manu makes it a matter of obligation upon 
the King. Accordingly Manu lays down as a matter of obligation that: 

VIII. 410. The King should order a Vaishya to trade to lend money, to 
cultivate the land, or to lend cattle, and the Shudra to serve the twice 
born Caste. Again Manu reverts to the subject and say: 

VIII 418. The King should carefully compel Vaishyas and Sudras to 
perform the work (prescribed) for them; for if these two castes swerved 
from their duties they would throw this whole world into confusion. 

What if the Kings do not act up to this obligation. This law of 
Chaturvarna is so supreme in the eyes of Manu that Manu will not 
allow himself to be thwarted by a King who will not keep his obligation 
to maintain this law. Boldly Manu forges a new law that such a king 
shall be disposed. One can imagine how dear Chaturvarna was to Manu 
and to Brahmanism. 

As I have said the Chaturvarna of the Vedic system was better 
than caste system was not very favourable to the creation of a Society 
which could be regarded as one single whole possessing the Unity of 
the ideal society. By its very theory the Chaturvarna has given birth 
to four classes. These four classes were far from friendly. Often they 
were quarreling and their quarrels were so bitter that they cannot but 
be designated as Class wars. All the same this old Chaturvarna had 
two saving features which Brahminism most selfishly removed. Firstly 
there was no isolation among the Varnas. Intermarriage and interdining 
the two strongest bonds for unity had full play. There was no room for 
the different Varnas to develop that anti-social feeling which destroys 
the very basis of Society. While the Kshatriyas fought against the 
Brahmins and the Brahmins fought against the Kshatriyas there were 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


328 


328 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

not wanting Kshatriyas who fought against the Kshatriyas 1 for the sake 
of Brahmins and there were not wanting Brahmins 2 who joined hands 
with Kshatriyas to put down the Brahmins. 

Secondly this old Chaturvarna was conventional. It was the ideal of 
the Society but it was not the law of the State. Brahmanism isolated the 
Varnas and sowed the seed of antagonism. Brahmanism made legal what 
was only conventional. By giving it a legal basis it perpetrated the mischief. 
The Vedic Chaturvarna if it was an evil would have died out by force of 
time and circumstances. By giving it the force of Law Brahmanism has 
made it eternal. This is probably the greatest mischief that Brahmanism 
has done to Hindu Society. 

In considering this question one cannot fail to notice that the obligation 
imposed upon the King for the maintenance of the law of Chaturvarna 
which is another name for the system of graded inequality does not require 
the King to enforce it against the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas. The 
obligation is limited to the enforcement of the law against the Vaishyas 
and the Shudras. Having regard to the fact that Brahmanism was so intent 
on giving the system the force of law the result has been very awkward 
to say the least about it. Notwithstanding this attempt at legalization the 
system remained half legal and half conventional, legal as to the Vaishyas 
and the Shudras and merely conventional as to Brahmins and Kshatriyas, 

This difference needs to be accounted for. Was Brahmanism honest in 
its attempt to give the system the force of law? Did it wish that each of 
the four Varnas be bound by it? The fact that Brahmanism would not bind 
the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas by the law it made, shows that in this 
business Brahmainsm was far from honest. If it believed in the system 
as ideal it could not have failed to make it an universal binding force. 

But there is more than dishonesty in this foul game. One can quite 
understand why the Brahmins were left free and untramelled by the 
shackles of the law. Manu called them Gods on earth and Gods must be 
above the law. But why were the Kshatriyas left free in the same way as 
the Brahmins. He knows that the Kshatriyas will not humble themselves 
before the Brahmins. He then proceeds to warn them, how the Brahmins 
can punish them if the Kshatriyas show arrogance and plan rebellion. 

IX. 320 When the Kshatriyas become in any way overbearing 
towards the Brahmanas, the Brahmanas themselves shall duly 
restrain them; for the Kshatriyas sprang from the Brahmanas. 

1 This is how Interpret the story of Parashuram’s war against the Kshatriyas. 

2 Buddhism was a revolt against Brahmins and Brhminism. Yet many or the early followers 
of Buddha & Buddhism were Brahmins. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


329 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 329 

IX. 321. Fire sprang from water, Kshatriya from Brahmanas, iron 
from stone; the all-penetrating force of those (three) has no effect on 
that whence they were produced. 

One might think that the reason why Manu does not impose an 
obligation upon the King to enforce the law against the Kshatriya was 
because the Brahmins felt themselves quite capable of dealing with 
Kshatriyas by their own prowess and without the aid of the King and 
that they meant to put their sanctions against the Kshatriyas when 
the time came and without fear of consequences. All this could not 
have been meant by Manu. For after uttering this vows of vengeance, 
and threats and imprecations Manu suddenly come down and begins to 
plead with the Kshatriyas for cooperation and common front with the 
Brahmins. In a verse next after the verse in which he utters the threats 
and imprecations against the Kshatriyas Manu pleads: 

IX. 323. But (a king who feels his end drawing nigh) shall bestow 
all his wealth, accumulated from fines on Brahmanas, make over his 
kingdom to his son and then seek death in battle. 

From imprecations to supplication is a very queer cry. What is the 
explanation of this anti-climax in the attitude of this strange behaviour 
of Manu towards the Kshatriyas? What is the object of this cooperation 
between Brahmins and Kshatriyas ? Against whom is this common 
front to be? Manu does not explain. A whole history of a thousand years 
must be told before this puzzle is solved and the questions satisfactorily 
answered. 

The history which furnishes the clue to the solution of this puzzle is 
the history of the class wars between the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas. 

Most of the orthdox Hindus are repelled by the doctrine of Class 
war which was propounded by Karl Marx and would be certainly 
shocked if they were told that the history of their own ancestors 
probably furnishes the most cogent evidence that Marx was searching 
for support of his theory. Indeed there have been numerous class wars 
between Brahmins and the Kshatriyas and only the most important 
of them have been recorded 1 in the ancient Hindu literature. We have 
record of the conflict between the Brahmins and the Kings who were 
all Kshatriyas. The first of these conflicts was a conflict with King 
Vena, the second with Pururavas, the third with Nahusha, fourth with 
Nimi and fifth with Sumukha. There is a record of a conflict between 
Vashishtha a Brahmin and Vishvamitra an ordinary Kshatriya and 
not a king. Then we have the record of the wholesale massacre of the 
Brahmins of Bhrigu clan by the Kshatriya decendants of Kratavirya 


1 All this record has been collected by Prof. Muir in his Original Sanskrit Texts. Vo. I. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


330 


330 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

and then we have the record of the whole class of Kshatriyas exterminated 
by Parashuram acting on behalf of the Brahmanas. The issues that brought 
them in conflict extended over a wide range and show how bitter and 
strained must have been the feelings between Brahmins and Kshatriyas. 
There were conflicts over the question whether the Kshatriya had a right 
to become a Brahmana. There were conflicts over the question, whether 
the Brahmins were subject to the authority or not. There were conflicts 
on the question who should salute first and who should give way to 
whom. The wars were wars 1 of authority, status and dignity. 

The results of these wars could not but be obvious to the Brahmins. 
Notwithstanding their boastful utterances they must have realized 
that it was not possible for them to crush the Kshatriyas and that 
notwithstanding the wars of extermination the Kshatriyas survived 
in sufficient numbers to plague the Brahmins. One need not pay any 
attention to the filthy story told by the Brahmins and alluded to by 
Manu that the Kshatriyas of the Manu’s day were not the original 
Kshatriyas but a race of new Kshatriyas begotten by the Brahmins upon 
the widows of the old Kshatriyas who were massacred by Parashuram. 
Blackmailing is one of the means which Brahmanism is never ashamed 
of using to advance its own purposes. The fight of Brahmanism against 
the Kshatriyas was from the very beginning a fight between a fool 
and a bully. Brahmanas were fighting against the Kshatriyas for the 
maintenance of the Chaturvarna. Now it is this very Chaturvarna which 
allowed bayonets to the Kshatriyas and denied them to the Brahmins. 
How under this theory could the Brahmin fight with the Kshatriya with 
any hope of success? It could not have taken long for the Brahmins to 
realise the truth — which Tallyrand told Napoleon — that it is easy to give 
bayonets but it is very difficult to sit on them and that as Kshatriyas 
had bayonets and Brahmins none, war with the Kshatriya was the way 
to ruin. These were the direct consequences of these wars between the 
Brahmins and the Kshatriyas. But there were others which could not 
have escaped the attention of the Brahmins. While the Brahmins and 
Kshatriyas were fighting among themselves nobody was left to check 
and keep the Vaishyas and the Shudras under control. They were on the 
road of social equality almost nearing to the status of the Brahmins and 
Kshatriyas. To Brahmanism the possibility of suppressing the Kshatriya 
was very remote and the danger of being overtaken by Vaishyas and 
Shudras were real and very real. Should the Brahmana continue to fight 
the Kshatriya and ignore the danger of the Vaishyas and the Shudras? 
Or Should the Brahmana give up the hopeless struggle against the 

1 See Hopkins History of the Ruling Races. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


331 


THE TRIUMPH OF BRAHMANISM 331 

Kshatriya and befriend him and make with him a common cause and 
suppress the growing menace of the Vaishyas and Shudras? Brahmanism 
after it was exhausted in the wars with the Kshathyas chose the second 
alternative. It sought to befriend their worthwhile enemies the Kshatriyas 
to work for a new ideal namely to enslave and exploit the two classes 
below them namely the Vaishyas and the Shudras. This new ideal 
must have taken shape some time when the Satpatha Brahmana came 
to be composed. It is in the Satpatha Brahmana we find the new ideal 
expressed it was well established. The language in which it is expressed, 
and the subject to which it is applied are so telling that I feel it should 
be quoted in its original terms. Says the author of the Satpatha 1 : 

“They then make the beast return (to the Ahavaniya 2 ) the he-goat 
goes first of them, then the ass, then the horse. Now in going away from 
this (Ahavaniya) the horse goes first, then the ass, then the he-goat — for 
the horse corresponds to the Kshatra (nobility), the ass to the Vaishya 
and Shudra, the he-goat to the Brahman and in-as-much as, in going 
from here, the horse goes first, therefore the Kshatriya, going first, is 
followed by the three others castes; and in-as-much as, in returning 
from here, the he-goat goes first, therefore the Brahman, going first, is 
followed by the three other castes. And in-as-much as the ass does not 
go first, either in going back from here, or in coming back from there, 
therefore the Brahmana and Kshatriya never go behind the Vaishya 
and Sudra; hence they walk thus in order to avoid a confusion between 
good and bad. And, moreover, he thus encloses those two castes (the 
Vaishyas and Sudra) on both sides by the priesthood and the nobility 
and makes them submissive.” 

Here is the explanation of the puzzling attitude of Manu towards the 
Kshatriyas, attitude of willing to wound but afraid to strike, of wishing 
to dictate but preferring to befriend. 

It is these wars and the compromise that had taught Manu that it was 
no use trying to coerce the Kshatriyas to submit to the domination of 
the Brahmin. It may be an ideal to be kept up. But as practical politics 
it was an impossible ideal. Like Bismark, Manu knew that politics was 
the game of the possible. What was possible was to make a common 
cause and to build up a common front between the Brhamins and the 
Kshatriyas against the Vaishyas and the Shudras and this is what Manu 
did. The pity of it is that it was done in the name of religion. This need 
not shock anybody who has studied the soul and spirit of Brahmanism. 
With Brahmanism religion is a cloak to cover and hide its acquisitive 
politics. 

L Eggeling Sathapatha Brahmana. Part III. pp. 226-27. 

2 Avavaniya. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


332 


CHAPTER 12 

The Morals of the House 

This is 61 page typed manuscript. This is a second copy but 
it is having corrections and modifications by Dr. Ambedkar 
himself. It is reproduced here taking all the corrections into 
account. There is one separate file entitled ‘Manu Smriti or 
the Gospel of Counter-Revolution ’. In that copy notes on Manu 
Smriti under various categories have been drawn. However, all 
these notes have been found to be incorporated in this essay, 
‘Morals of the Mouse.’ It is felt that the printing of these notes 
would be a mere repetition of this essay. Hence, the said copy 
is not separately printed: 

I 

The morals of the Hindus and their religious creed are prescribed by 
the Smritis which form a part of the Sacred literature of the Hindus. 
It is to the Smritis that one must go to understand the Ethics and the 
Religion of the Hindus. The Smritis are by no means few in number. A 
conservative estimate gives the total number of Smritis to be 108. The 
large number of Smritis cannot however make our problem difficult. For 
though the Smritis are numerous they do not differ in essentials. Indeed 
they repeat one another so closely that reading the Smritis creates a 
most monotonous task. They are all derived from one common source. 
That source is the Smriti of Manu otherwise known as Manava Dharma 
Shastra. The other Smritis are faithful repetitions of the Manu Smriti. 
A study of the Manu Smriti is therefore quite sufficient to obtain an 
adequate conception of the moral standards and Religious notions of 
the Hindus. 

It may be said that Manu Smriti — and the same is true of the other 
Smritis — is a Code of Laws. It is not a book of Ethics nor is it a book 
of Religion and to take a book of Laws and to treat it as though it is 
a book of Ethics and Religion is to confound Ethics, Religion and Law. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


333 


THE MORALS OF THE HOUSE 333 

In the first place it is only in modern times that Law has been 
separated from Religion. In all ancient Society, Law and Religion were 
one. As Prof. Max Muller 1 points out that though : — 

“Law seems naturally to be the foundation of society, and the bond that 
binds a nation together. Those who look below the surface have quickly 
perceived that law itself, at least ancient law, derives its authority, 

its force, its very life from religion The belief that the law giver 

enjoyed some closer intimacy with the Deity than ordinary mortals, 
pervades the ancient traditions of many nations. According to a well 
known passage in Diodorus Siculus, the Egyptians believed their laws 
to have been communicated to Menvis by Hermes; the Cretaus held that 
Minos received his laws from Zeus, the Lacedaemonians that Lykurgus 
received his laws from Apollon. According to the Arians, their law giver 
Zarathustras had received his Laws from the Good Spirit; According 
to the Stoe, Zamolixis received his laws from the goddess Hestia; and 
according to the Jews, Moses received his laws from the God las.” 

No one has pointed out more forcibly than Sir Henry Mains 2 that 
in ancient times religion as a divine influence was underlying and 
supporting every relation of life and every social institution when he 
says of Religion as: 

“A supernatural presidency (which) is supposed to consecrate and 
keep together all the cardinal institutions of those times, the state, the 
Race, and the Family ”. 

From this superntural presidency of Reigion, Law had notsucceded in 
finding an escape until at a later time when law Finally breaks away 
from religion but not without leaving many traces to show the link it 
had with Religion at the very beginning of human history. 

Again it is only in modern times that a difference is being made 
between Religion and Ethics. Religion and Ethics are inextricably and 
indissolubly bound together. Morality and Ethics are essentially practical. 
As Prof. Jacks insists 3 that the problem of Ethics is not merely getting 
the Good understood but realised, not merely getting the Right placed 
on scientific basis but done. Morality is a mere matter of defining what 
is good and what is right. Prof. Jacks rightly says : 

“Whenver we embark on the study of morality without interest 
in its application I cannot but think that it is not morality we are 
studying. Morality does not arise till the point of application is 
reached. The effect of a moral theory launched upon the world is 

1 Science of Religion, pages 150-151. 

2 Ancient Law p. 6. 

3 “ Morals and Religion ” — Hibbert Journal Vol. XIX. pp. 615-621. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


334 


334 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

next to nothing unless the application of it can be reinforced by 
powerful motives. The good life, as Aristotle pointed out is a very 
difficult affair; difficult even when it goes no further than conformity 
to existing conventions. But when the good life demands that existing 
standards must be transcended how can this be effected without an 
immense liberation of power? Mere information as to why men should 
do right has no effect against their natural tendencies to do wrong — it 
is no match for the difficulties that beset good life.” 

Unless some motive force comes to its aid morality remains inert. 
There can be no doubt that what gives motive force to morality is 
Religion. It is a propelling force which creates, to use again the language 
of Principal Jacks: 

“ Motives which are strong enough to overcome the enormous 
difficulties involved in living the good life, even in its simpler forms, 
and adequate to maintain that continuous improvement of the moral 
ideal.” 

Religion as a motive force reinforces the moral will in various ways. 
Sometimes it takes the form of sanctions by laying down a scheme of 
rewards and punishments after death; some times it makes rules of 
morality as the commandments of God; some times it invests these 
rules with sanctity which evokes willing obedience. But these are only 
different ways in which motive power generated by Religion helps to 
sustain moral life in action. Religion is the dynamics which moves the 
wheels of morality. 

If Ethics and Morality are duties then there can be no doubt that 
Manu Smriti is a book of Ethics. Any one who takes the trouble 
to read the Smriti of Manu will have to admit that if there is any 
subject which figures prominently in the book it is that of duties. 
Manu was the first to syatematise and codify the duties to which a 
Hindu was bound. He distinguishes between Varnashramadharmas 
and Sadharandharmas. The Varnashramdharmas are the specific 
duties relating to one’s station in life i.e. one’s station as determined 
by one’s Varna or caste and one’s Ashram or particular stage of life. 
The Sadharandharmas are duties irrespective of one’s age, caste or 
creed i.e. duties obligatory on man as man and not as a member of a 
particular community or social class or as being at a particular stage 
or period of life. The whole book deals with duties and with nothing 
else. Manu Smriti is thus a book of Law, Religion and Ethics rolled 
into one. It is Ethics because it deals with duties of men. It is religion 
because it deals with Caste which is the soul of Hinduism. It is Law 
because it prescribes penalities for breach of duties. In this view there 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


335 


THE MORALS OF THE HOUSE 335 

is nothing wrong in going to Manu Smriti to ascertain the moral standards 
and religious notions of the Hindus. 

That Manu Smriti is a book of Religion may not be quite obvious. 
That is because Hinduism is a very illusive term. Different writers have 
defined it in various ways. 

Sir D. Ibbetson 1 defines Hinduism as : 

“A hereditary sacerdotalism with Brahmins for its devices, the vitality 
of which is preserved by the social institution of caste and which include 
all shades and diversities of religion native to India, as distinct from 
foreign importations of Christianity and islam, and from the later 
outgrowths of Buddhism, more doubtfully of Sikhism and still more 
doubtfully of Jainism”. 

Sir J. A. Baines 2 defined Hinduism as : — 

“The large residium that is not Sikh, or Jain, or Buddhist or professedly 
Animistic, or included in one of the foreign religions such as Islam. 
Mazdaism. Christianity, or Hebraism.” 

To Sir Edward Gait 3 Hinduism : — 

“ is a complex congenies of creeds and doctrines. It shelters within 
its portals monotheists, polytheists, and pantheists; Worshippers of the 
great God Siva and Vishnu, or of their female counterparts, as well 
as worshippers of the divine mothers, of the spirits of trees, rocks and 
streams and of the tutelary village deities; persons who propitate their 
deity by all matter of bloody sacrifices, and persons who will not only 
kill no living creature, but who must not even use the word “cut”; those 
whose ritual consists mainly of prayers and hymns, and those who 
indulge in unspeakable orgies in the name of religion”. 

This discription of complexity is full but is still incomplete. To the list 
must be added those who revere the cow and those who eat it, those who 
worship natural forces, and those who worship a single God; those who 
are worshippers of idols, demons, ghosts, ancestors, saints and heroes. 

Such are the answers given by the three Census Commissioners to 
the simple question what is Hinduism. Others have not found it less 
difficult to answer the question. Consider how Sir A. Lyall has fared in 
answering the question. In his “ Rede Lecture ” delivered at Cambridge 
in 1891 he said 4 : 

“And if I were asked for a definition of Hinduism I could give no 
precise answer, I could not define it concisely by giving its central 

1 Punjab Census Report 1881. para 214. 

2 Census of India. Report 1881. p. 158. 

3 Census of India. Report 1911 p. 114. 

4 Asiatic Studies Vol. II pp. 287-88. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


336 


336 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

doctrines and its essential articles of faith; as I might do in describing 
of the great historical Religions. For the word Hindu is not exclusively a 
religious denomination; it denotes also a country, and to certain degree 
a race. When we speak of Christian, a Mahomedan, or a Buddhist, we 
mean a particular religious community, in the widest sense, without 
distinction of race or place. When we talk of a Russian or a Persian, 
we indicate country or parentage without distinction of creed. But when 
a person tells me that he is a Hindu, I know that he means all three 
things together — Religion. Parentage and Country.” 

Speaking of Hinduism as a Religion Sir Alfred Lyall said that: 

“Hinduism was a tangled mugle of disorderly superstitions, the 
collection of rights, worships, beliefs, traditions and mythologies, that 
are sanctioned by the sacred books and ordinances of the Brahmins and 
are propogated by Brahmanic teachings.” 

Lastly I will quote the defintion given by a Hindu Mr. G. P. Sen who 
not merely a Hindu but is a student of Hinduism. In his book called 
‘Introduction to the study of Hinduism’ Mr. Sen says : — 

“ Hinduism is what the Hindus, or a major portion of them in a 
Hindu Community do. ” 

Is there then no principle in Hinduism which all Hindus no matter 
what their other differences are, feel bound to render willing obedience? 
It seems to me there is and that principle is the principle of Caste. There 
may be a difference of opinion as to which matters constitute matters 
of essence so far as Hinduism is concerned. But there can be no doubt 
that Caste is one and an essential and integral part of Hinduism. Every 
Hindu — if he is not merely a statutory Hindu-believes in Caste and every 
Hindu — even one who prides himself on being a statutory Hindu — has a 
Caste. A Hindu is as much born into caste as he is born in Hinduism. 
Indeed a person connot be born in Hinduism unless he is born in a Caste. 
Caste and Hinduism are inseparable. As Prof. Max Muller 1 observes : 

“Modern Hinduism rests on the system of Caste as on a rock which 
no arguments can shake.” 

It therefore follows that in so far as Manu lays down the creed of the 
Caste and in so far as Hinduism at its core is the creed of Caste the 
Manu Smriti must be accepted as the Book of Religion. 

II 

What are the Ethical and Religious norms prescribed by Manu for 
Hindus to observe and follow? 


Science of Religion, p. 28. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


337 


THE MORALS OF THE HOUSE 337 

To begin with, Manu divides Hindus into four varnas or social orders. 
He not only divides Hindus into four orders he also grades them. The 
following is his scheme of gradation. 

X. 3. On account of his pre-eminence, on account of the superiority of 
his origin, on account of his observance of (particular) restrictive rules, 
and on account of his particular sanctification the Brahman is the Lord 
of (all) Varnas. 

He proceeds to amplify his reasons and does so in the following 
characteristic manner : — 

I. 93. As the Brahmana sprang from (Prajapati’s i.e.Gods) mouth, as 
he was first-born, and as he possesses the Veda, he is by right the lord 
of this whole creation. 

I. 94. For the self existent (Svayambhu i.e. God), having performed 
austerities, produced him first from his own mouth, in order that the 
offerings might be conveyed to the Gods and Manes and that this 
universe might be preserved. 

I. 95. What created being can surpass him, through whose mouth 
the Gods continually consume the sacrificial viands and the manes the 
offerings to the dead. 

I. 96. Of created beings the most excellent are said to be those which 
are animated; of the animated, those who subsist by intelligence; of the 
inteligent, mankind; and of the men, the Brahmans. 

Besides the reason given by Manu the Brahmin is first in rank because 
he was produced by God from his mouth, in order that the offerings 
might be conveyed to the Gods and manes. Manu gives another reason 
for the supremacy of the Brahmins. 

He says : — 

I. 98. The very birth of a Brahmana is an eternal incarnation of the 
sacred Law (Veda); for he is born to (fulfil) the sacred law, and become 
one with Brahman (God). 

I. 99. A Brahamana, coming into existence, is born as the highest on 
earth, the lord of all created beings, for the protection of the treasury 
of the Law. 

Manu concludes by saying that : 

I. 101. The Brahmana eats but his own food, wears but his own 
apparel, bestows but his own alms; other mortals subsist through the 
benevolence of the Brahmana.” 

Because according to Manu : 

I. 100. Whatever exists in the world is the property of the Brahmana; 
on account of the excellence of his origin the Brahmana is, indeed, 
entitled to it all. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


338 


338 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

It is really an understatement to say that according to Manu the 
Brahman is a lord of all creation. For Manu gives a warning to the 
effect that : — 

IX. 317. A Brahmana, be he ignorant or learned, is a great divinity, 
just as the fire, whether carried forth (for the performance of a burnt 
oblation) or not carried forth, is a great divinity. 

IX. 319. Thus, though the Brahmans employ themselves in all (sorts) 
of mean occupations, they must be honoured in every way; (for each of) 
them is a very great deity. 

Being a deity the Brahmin is above law and above the King. Manu 
directs : — 

VII. 37. Let the King, after rising early in the morning, worship 
Brahmans who are well versed in the threefold sacred science and learned 
(in polity), and follow their advice 

VII. 38. Let him daily worship aged Brahmans who know the Veda 
and are pure 

Finally Manu says : 

XI. 35. The Brahman is (hereby) declared (to be) the creator (of the 
world), the punisher, the teacher, (and hence) a benefactor (of all created 
beings); to him let no man say anything unpropitions, nor use any harsh 
words. 

In the Code of Manu there are rules regarding the different occupations 
which the different orders are required to follow: 

I. 88. To Brahmens he (Swayambhu Manu) assigned the duties of reading 
the Veda, of teaching it, of sacrificing, of assisting others to sacrifice, 
of giving alms, if they the rich, and if indiquent, of receiving of gifts. 

I. 89. To defend the people, to give alms, to sacrifice, to read the Veda, 
to shun the allurements of sensual gratifiction, are, in a few words, the 
duties of a Kshatriya. 

I. 90. To keep herds of cattle, to bestow largeness, to sacrifice, to read 
the scriptures, to carry on trade, to lend at interest, and to cultivate 
land are prescribed or permitted to a Vaishya. 

I. 91. One principal duty the supreme Ruler assigns to a Shudra; namely, 
to serve the before mentioned classes, without depreciating their worth. 

1.74. Let such Brahmans as are intent on the means of attaining the 
supreme Godhead, and firm in their own duties, completely perform, in 
order, the six following acts: 

X. 75. Reading the Vedas, the teaching others to read them, sacrificing, 
and assisting others, to sacrifice, giving to the poor if themselves have 
enough, and accepting gifts from the virtuous if themselves are poor, are 
the six prescribed acts of the first born class; 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


339 


THE MORALS OF THE HOUSE 339 

X. 76. But, among those six acts of a Brahmin, three are his means 
of susbsistence; assisting to sacrifice, teaching the Vedas, and receiving 
gifts from a pure handed giver. 

X. 77. Three acts of duty cease with the Brahman, and belong not to 
the Kshatriya; teaching the Vedas, officiating at a sacrifice, and, thirdly, 
receiving presents. 

X. 78. Those three are also (by the fixed rule of law) forbidden to the 
Vaisya; since Manu, the Lord of all men, prescribed not those acts to 
the two classes, military and commercial. 

X. 79. The means of subsistence, peculiar to the Kshatriya, are bearing 
arms, either held for striking or missile, to the Vaisya, merchandize, 
attending on cattle, and agriculture but with a view to the next life, 
the duties of both are alms giving, reading, sacrificing.” 

Besides prescribing rank and occupation Manu grants privileges to 
certain orders and imposes penalties on certain orders. 

As to privileges those relating to marriage may be referred to first. 
Manu says : 

III. 12. For the first marriage of the twice born classes, a woman 
of the same class is recommended but for such as are impelled by 
inclination to marry again, women in the direct order of the classes 
are to be preferred : 

III. 13. A Sudra woman only must be the wife of a Sudra; she and 
a Vaisya, of a Vaisya; they two and a Kshatriya, of a Kshatriya; those 
three and a Brahmani of a Brahman. 

Then there are privileges relating to occupations. These privileges 
stand out quite prominently when Manu deals with the question as to 
what a person is to do when he is in distress: 

X. 81. Yet a Brahmen, unable to subsist by his duties just mentioned, 
may live by the duty of a soldier; for that is the next in rank. 

X. 82. If it be asked, how he must live, should he be unable to get 
a subsistence by either of those employments; the answer is, he may 
subsist as a mercantile man, applying himself in person to tillage and 
attendance on cattle. 

X. 83. But a Brahman and a Kshatriya, obliged to subsist by the acts 
of a Vaisya, must avoid with care, if they can live by keeping herds, the 
business of tillage, which gives great pain to sentient creatures, and is 
dependent on the labour of others, as bulls and so forth. 

X. 84. Some are of opinion, that agriculture is excellent, but it is a 
mode of subsistence which the benevolent greatly blame, for the iron 
mouthed pieces of wood not only wound the earth, but the creatures 
dwelling in it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


340 


340 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

X. 85. If through want of a virtuous livelihood, they cannot follow 
laudable occupations, they may then gain a competence of wealth by 
selling commodities usually sold by merchants, avoiding what ought to 
be avoided. 

X. 86. They must avoid selling liquids of all sorts, dressed grain, seeds 
of tila, stones, salt, cattle, and human creatures. 

X. 87. All woven cloth dyed red, cloth made of Sana, of cshuma-bark, 
and of wool, even though not red; fruit, roots, and medicinal plants. 

X. 88. Water, iron, poison, flesh-meat, the moon-plant, and perfumes 
of any sort; milk, honey, butter milk, clarified butter, oil of tila, wax 
sugar, and blades of cusa grass; 

X. 89. All beasts of the forest, as deer and the like, ravenous beasts, 
birds, and fish; spirituous liquors, nili, or indigo, and lascha, or lac; and 
all beasts with uncloven hoofs. 

X. 90. But the brahmen-husbandman may at pleasure sell pure tila- 
seeds for the purpose of holy rites, if he keep them not long with a 
hope of more gain, and shall have produced them by his own culture.; 

X. 91. If he apply seeds of tila to any purpose but food, anoiting, and 
sacred oblations, he shall be plunged, in the shape of a worm, together 
with his parents, into the ordure of dogs. 

X. 92. By selling flesh-meat, lac or salt, a Brahmen immediately sinks 
low; by selling milk three days, he falls to a level with a Sudra. 

X. 93. And by selling the other forbidden commodities with his own 
free will, he assumes in this world, after seven nights, the nature of a 
mere Vaisya. 

X. 94. Fluid things may, however, be bartered for other fluids, but 
not salt for anything liquid; so may dressed grain for grain undressed, 
and tila-seeds for grain in the husk, equal weights or measures being 
given and taken. 

X. 102. The Brahmen having fallen into distress, may receive gifts 
from any person whatever; for by no sacred rule can it be shown, that 
absolute purity can be sullied. 

X. 103. From interpreting the Veda, from officiating at sacrifices, or 
from taking presents, though in modes generally disapproved, no sin is 
committed by priests in distress; for they are as pure as fire or water. 

Compare with this what Manu has to say with regard, to what the 
other Varnas can do in an emergency, Manu says : 

X. 96. A man of lowest class, who through covetousness, lives by the 
acts of the highest, let the king strip of all his wealth and instantly 
banish. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


341 


THE MORALS OF THE HOUSE 341 

X. 97. His own office, though defectively performed, is preferable 
to that of another, though performed completely; for he, who without 
necessity discharges the duties of another class, immediately forfeits 
his own. 

X. 98. A mercantile man, unable to subsist by his own duties, may 
descend even to the servile acts of a Sudra, taking care never to do 
what ought never to be done; but, when he has gained a competence, 
let him depart from service. 

X. 99. A man of fourth class, not Finding employment by waiting 
on the twice born, while his wife and son are tormented with hunger, 
may subsist by handicrafts. 

X. 121. If a Sudra want a subsistence and cannot attend priest, he 
may serve a Kshatriya; or, if he cannot wait on a soldier by birth, he 
may gain his livelihood by serving an opulent Vaisya. 

X. 122. To him, who serves Brahmens, with a view to a heavenly 
reward, or even with view to both this life and the next, the union of 
the word Brahmen with his name of servant will assuredly bring success. 

X. 123. Attendance on Brahmens is pronounced the best work of Sudra; 
whatever else he may perform will comparatively avail him nothing. 

X. 124. They must allot him a fit maintenance according to their 
own circumstances, after considering his ability, his exertions, and the 
number of those, whom he must provide with nourishment. 

X. 125. What remains of their dressed rice must be given to him, 
and apparel which they have worn, and the refuse of their grain, and 
their old household furniture. 

X. 126. There is no guilt in a man of the servile class who eats leeks 
and other forbidden vegetables; he must not have the sacred investiture; 
he has no business with the duty of making oblations to fire and the 
like, but there is no prohibition against his offering dressed grain as 
a sacrifice, by way of discharging his own duty. 

X. 127. Even Sudras, who were anxious to perform their entire duty, 
and, knowing what they should perform, imitate the practice of good 
men in the household sacraments, but without any holy text, except 
those containing praise and salutations, are so far from sinning, that 
they acquire just applause. 

X. 128. As a Sudra, without injuring another man, performs the 
lawful acts of the twice-born, even thus, without being censured, he 
gains exaltation in this world and in the next. 

X. 129. No superfluous collection of wealth must be made by a 
Sudra, even though he has power to make it, since a servile man, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


342 


342 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

who has amassed riches, becomes proud, and, by his insolence or neglect, 
gives pain even to Brahmens. 

He concludes : — 

X. 130. Such, as have been fully declared, are the several duties of the 
four classes in distress for subsistence, and, if they perform them exactly, 
they shall attain the highest beatitude. 

The privileges to some were not merely social they were also financial, 
Says Manu : — 

VIII. 35. From the man, who shall say with truth, ‘This property, which 
has been kept, belongs to me’, the king may take a sixth or twelfth part, 
for having secured it. 

VIII. 36. But he, who shall say so falsely, may be fined either an eighth 
part of his own property, or else in some small proportion to the value of 
the goods falsely claimed, a just calcultion having been made. 

VIII. 37. A learned Brahmen, having found a treasure formerly . hidden, 
may take it without any deduction; since he is the lord of all. 

VIII. 38. But of a treasure anciently deposited under ground, which any 
other subject or the king has discovered, the king may lay up half in his 
treasury having given half to the Brahmens. 

IX. 323. Should the king be near his end through some incurable disease, 
he must bestow on the priests all his riches, accumulated his kingdom to 
his son, let him seek death in battle, or if there be no war, by abstaining 
from food. 

VII. 127. Having ascertained the rates of purchase and sale, the length 
of the way, the expenses of food and of condiments the charges of securing 
the goods carried, and the net profits of trade, let the king oblige traders 
to pay taxes on their saleable commodities. 

VII. 128. After full consideration, let a king so levy those taxes continually 
in his dominions, that both he and the merchant may receive a just 
compensation for their several acts. 

VII. 129. As the leech, the suckling calf, and the bee, take their natural 
food by little and little, thus must a king draw from his dominions an 
annual revenue. 

VII. 130. Of cattle, of gems, of gold and silver, added each year to the 
capital stock, a fiftieth part may be taken by the king; of grain, an eighth 
part, a sixth, or a twelfth, according to the difference of the soil, and the 
labour necessary to cultivate it. 

VII. 131. He may also take a sixth part of the clear annual increase 
of trees, fleshmeat, honey, clarified butter, perfumes, medical substances, 
liquids, flowers, roots, and fruit. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


343 


THE MORALS OF THE HOUSE 343 

VII. 132. Of gathered leaves, pot-herbs, grass, utencils made with 
leather or cane, earthen pots, and all things made of stone. 

VII. 132. A king, even though dying with want, must not receive 
any tax from a Brahman learned in the Vedas, nor suffer such a 
Brahmen, residing in his territories, to be afflicted with hunger. 

VII. 134. Of that king, in whose dominion a learned Brahmen is 
afflicted with hunger, the whole kingdom will in a short time be 
afflicted with famine. 

VII. 137, Let the king order a mere trifle to be paid, in the name of 
the annual tax, by the meaner inhabitants of his realm, who subsist 
by petty traffic. 

VII. 138. By low handicraftsmen, artificers, and servile men, who 
support themselves by labour, the king may cause work to be done 
for a day in each month. 

VIII. 394. Neither a blind man, nor an idiot, nor a cripple, nor a man 
full seventy years old, nor one who confers great benefits on priests 
of eminent learning, shall be compelled by any king to pay taxes. 

X. 118. A military king, who takes even a fourth part of the crops 
of his realm at a time of urgent necessity, as of war or invasion, and 
protects his people to the utmost of his power, commits no sin: 

X. 119. His peculiar duty is conquest, and he must not recede 
from battle; so that, while he defends by his arms the merchant and 
husbandman, he may levy the legal tax as the price of protection. 

X. 120. The tax on the mercantile class, which in times of 
prosperity must be only a twelfth part of their crops, and a fiftieth 
of their personal profits, may be an eighth of their crops in a time of 
distress, or a sixth, which is the medium, or even a fourth in great 
public adversity; but a twentieth of their gains on money, and other 
moveables, is the highest tax; serving men, artisans, and mechanics, 
must assist by their labour, but at no time pay taxes. 

X. 187. To the nearest sapinda, male or female, after him in the 
third degree, the inheritance next belongs; then, on failure of sapindas 
and of their issue the samanodaca, or distant kinsman, shall be the 
heir; or the spiritual preceptor, or the pupil, or the fellow student, 
of the deceased. 

IX. 188. On failure of all those, the lawful heirs are such Brahmens, 
as have read the three Vedas, as are pure in body and mind, as have 
subdued their passions; and they must consequently offer the cake; 
thus the rites of obsequies cannot fail. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


344 


344 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

IX. 189. The property of a Brahmen shall never be taken as an 
escheat by the king; this is a fixed law; but the wealth of the other 
classes, on failure of all heirs, the king may take. 

The terms on which the different social orders should carry on their 
associated life has been defined by Manu in a set of rules which form 
a very important part of the morals of the Hindu House. 

Manu ordains that: 

X. 3. From priority of birth, from superiority of origin, from a more 
exact knowledge of scripture, and from a distinction in the sacrificial 
thread, the Brahmen is the lord of all classes. 

IX. 317. A Brahmen, whether learned or ignorant, is a powerful 
divinity; even as fire is powerful divinity, whether consecrated or 
popular. 

IX. 319. Thus, although Brahmens employ themselves in all sorts 
of mean occupations, they must invariably be honoured; for they are 
something transcendently divine. 

VII. 35. A king was created as the protector of all those classes and 
orders, who, from the first to the last, discharge their several duties. 

VII. 36. And all, that must be done by him, for the protection of 
his people, with the assistance of good ministers, I will declare to 
you, as the law directs, in due order. 

VII. 37. Let the king, having risen at early dawn, respectfully 
attend to Brahmen, learned in the three Vedas, and in the science 
of ethics, and by their decision let him abide. 

VII. 38. Constantly must he show respect to Brahmens, who have 
grown old, both in years and in piety, who know the scriptures, 
who in body and mind are pure; for he, who honours the aged, will 
perpetually be honoured even by cruel demons: 

IX. 313. Let him not, although in the greatest distress for money, 
provoke Brahmens to anger by taking their prosperty; for they, once 
enraged, could immediately by sacrifices and imprecations destroy 
him with his troops, elephants, horses and cars. 

Such was to be the relationship in the field of political life. For 
ordinary social intercourse between the different Varnas Manu lays 
down the following rules: — 

III. 68. A house-keeper has five places of slaughter, or where small 
living creatures may be slain; his kitchen-hearth, his grindstone, 
his broom, his pestle and mortar, his water-pot; by using which, he 
becomes in bondage to sin: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


345 


THE MORALS OF THE HOUSE 345 

III. 69. For the sake of expiating offences committed ignorantly in those 
places mentioned in order, the five great sacraments were appointed by 
eminent sages to be performed each day by such as keep house. 

III. 70. Teaching and studying the scripture is the sacrament of the 
Veda; offering cakes and water, the sacrament of the Manes, an oblation 
to fire, the sacrament of the Deities; giving rice or other food to living 
creatures, the sacrament of spirits; receiving guests with honour, the 
sacrament of men. 

III. 71. Whoever omits not those five great ceremonies, if he have 
ability to perform them, is untainted by the sons of the five slaughtering 
places, even though he constantly reside at home; 

III. 84. In his domestic Are for dressing the food of all the Gods, after 
the prescribed ceremony, let a Brahmen make an oblation each day to 
these following divinities. 

After it is offered to the deities Manu directs: — 

III. 92. The share of dogs, of outcasts, of dog-feeders, of sinful men, 
punished with elephantiasis or consumption, of crows, and of reptiles, 
let him drop on the ground by little and little. 

With regard to the rules of hospitality Manu directs the householder: 

III. 102. A Brahmen, staying but one night as a guest, is called an 
atithi, since continuing so short a time, he is not even a sojourner for 
a whole tithi, or day of the moon. 

III. 98. But an offering in the fire of a sacerdotal mouth, which richly 
blazes with true knowledge and piety, will release the giver from distress 
and even from deadly sin. 

III. 107. To the highest guests in the best form, to the lowest in the 
worst, to the equal equally, let him offer seats, resting places, couches; 
giving them proportionable attendance when they depart; and honour, 
as long as they stay. 

III. 110. A military man is not denominated a guest in the house of a 
Brahman; nor a man of the commercial or servile class; nor his familiar 
friend, nor his paternal kinsmen; nor his preceptor. 

III. 111. But if a warrior come to his house in the form of a guest, let 
food be prepared for him, according to his desire, after the beforementioned 
Brahmens have eaten. 

III. 112. Even to a merchant or a labourer, approaching his house in 
the manner of guests, let him give food, showing marks of benevolence 
at the same time with his domestics. 

On social bearing of one class towards another Manu has laid down 
some very interesting ordinances. He has an equation for social status: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


346 


346 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

II. 135. The student must consider a Brahmen, though but ten years 
old, and a Kshatriya, though aged a hundred years, as father and son; as 
between those two, the young Brahmen is to be respected as the father. 

II. 136. Wealth, kindred, age, moral conduct, and, fifthly divine 
knowledge, entitle men to respect; but that which is last mentioned in 
order, is the most respectable. 

II. 137. Whatever man of the three highest classes possesses the most 
of those five, both in number and degree that man is entitled to most 
respect; even a Sudra, if he have entered the tenth decade of his age. 

II. 138. Way must be made for a man in a wheeled carriage, or above 
ninety years old, or afflicted with disease, or carrying a burthen; for a 
woman; for a priest just returned from the mansion of his preceptor; 
for a prince, and for a bridegroom. 

II. 139. Among all those, if they be met at one time, the priest just 
returned home and the prince are most to be honoured; and of those 
two, the priest just returned, should be treated with more respect than 
the prince. 

As illustrating the rules of social bearing a reference may be made 
to rules regarding salutation: 

II. 121. A youth who habitually greets and constantly reverses the 
aged, obtains an increase of four things; life, knowledge, fame, strength. 

II. 122. After the word of salutation, a Brahman must address an 
elder; saying, “I am such an one,” pronouncing his own name. 

II. 123. If any persons, through ignorance of the Sanskrit language, 
understand not the import of his name, to them should a learned man 
say, “ It is I”; and in that manner he should address all classes of women. 

II. 124. In the salutation he should pronounce, after his own name, 
the vocative particle ‘bhoh’; for the particle ‘bhoh’ is held by the wise 
to have the same property with names fully expressed. 

II. 125. A Brahmen should thus be saluted in return; “ May’st thou 
live long, excellent man ”, and at the end of his name, the vowel and 
preceding consonant should be lengthened, with an acute accent, to three 
syllabic moments or short vowels. 

II. 126. That Brahmen, who knows not the form of returning a 
salutation, must not be saluted by a man of learning; as a Shudra, 
even so is he. 

II. 127. Let a learned man ask a priest, when he meets him, if his 
devotion prospers, a warrior, if he is unhurt; a merchant, if his wealth 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


347 


THE MORALS OF THE HOUSE 347 

is secure; and one of the servile classes, if he enjoys good health; using 
respectively the words, cusalam, anamayam, ksheman and anarogyam. 

The provisions laid down by Manu in relation to Religion and Religious 
Sacraments and Sacrifice are worthy of note. 

The ordinances of Manu relating to Sacraments and sacrifices are as 
follows: 

III. 68. A house-keeper has five places of slaughter, or where small 
living creatures may be slain; his kitchen-hearth, his grindstone, his 
broom, his pastle and mortar, his water-pot; by using which, he become 
in bondage to sin. 

III. 69. For the sake of expiating offences committed ignorantly in those 
places mentioned in order, the five great sacraments were appointed by 
eminent sages to be performed each day by such as keep house. 

III. 70. Teaching and studying the scriptures is the sacrament of the 
Veda; offering cakes and water, the sacrament of the Manes, an oblation 
to fire, the sacrament of the Deities; giving rice or other food to living 
creatures, the sacraments of spirits; receiving guests with honour, the 
sacrament of men. 

III. 71. Whoever omits not those five great ceremonies, if he have 
ability to perform them, is untainted by the sons of the five slaughtering 
places, even though he constantly reside at home. 

Manu then proceeds to lay down that all are not entitled to the 
benefit of the sacraments and all have not the same right to perform 
the sacrifices. 

He defines the position of women and Shudras in the matter of 
Sacraments and sacrifices. As to women Manu says : — 

II. 66. The same ceremonies, except that of the sacrificial thread, must 
be duly performed for women at the same age and in the same order, 
that the body may be made perfect; but without any text from the Veda.” 

As to Shudras, Manu says : — 

X. 127. Even Shudras, who were anxious to perform their entire duty, 
and, knowing what they should perform initate the practice of , good 
men in the household sacraments, but without any holy text, except 
those containing praise and salutation, are so far from sinning, that 
they acquire just applause. 

The investiture of a person with the sacred thread is a very important 
sacrament. 

II. 36. In the eighth year from the conception of a Brahman, in the 
eleventh from that of a Kshatriya, and in the twelfth from that of a 
Vaisya, let the father invest the child with the mark of his class. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


348 


348 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

II. 37. Should a Brahman, or his father for him, be desirous of his 
advancement in sacred knowledge; a Kshatriya, of extending his power; 
or a Vaisya of engaging in mercantile business; the investiture may be 
made in the fifth, sixth, or eighth years respectively. 

II. 38. The ceremony of investiture hallowed by the Gayatri must not 
be delayed, in the case of a priest, beyond the sixteenth year; nor in 
that of a soldier, beyond the twenty second; nor in that of a merchant, 
beyond the twenty fourth. 

II. 39. After that, all youths of these three classes, who have not been 
invested at the proper time, become vratyas, or outcasts, degraded from 
the Gayatri, and condemned by the virtuous. 

As to the Gayatri it is a mantra and this is how Manu explains its 
importance : — 

II. 76. Brahma milked out, as it were, from the three Vedas, the 
letter A, the letter U, and the letter M which form by their coalition 
the triliteral monosyllable, together with three mysterious words bhur, 
bhuvah, svah or earth, sky, heaven. 

II. 77. From the three Vedas, also, the Lord of creatures, 
incomprehensibly exalted, successively milked out the three measures 
of that ineffable text, beginning with the word tad, and entitled Savitri 
or Gayatri. 

II. 78. A priest who shall know the Veda, and shall pronounce to 
himself, both morning and evening, that syllable, and that holy text 
preceded by the three words, shall attain the sanctity which the Veda 
confers: 

II. 79. And a twice born man, who shall a thousand times repeat those 
three (om, the vyahritis, and the gayatri), apart from the multitude, 
shall be released in a month even from a great offence, as a snake 
from his slough. 

II. 80. The priest, the soldier, and the merchant, who shall neglect 
this mysterious text, and fail to perform in due season his peculiar acts 
of piety, shall meet with contempt among the virtuous. 

II. 81. The great immutable words, preceded by the triliteral syllable, 
and followed by the gayatri which consists of three measures, must be 
considered as the mouth, or principal part of the Veda; 

II. 82. Whoever shall repeat, day by day, for three years, without 
negligence, that sacred text, shall hereafter approach the divine essence, 
move as freely as air, and assume an ethereal form. 

II. 83. The triliteral monosyllable is an emblem of the Supreme, the 
suppressions of breath with a mind fixed on God are the highest 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


349 


THE MORALS OF THE HOUSE 349 

devotion; but nothing is more exalted than the Gayatri; a declaration 
of truth is more excellant than silence. 

II. 84. All rites ordained in the Veda, oblations to fire, and solemn 
sacrifices pass away; but that which passes not away, is declared to 
be the syllable om, thence called acshara; since it is a symbol of God, 
the Lord of created beings. 

II. 85. The act of repeating his Holy Name is ten times better than 
the appointed sacrifice; an hundred times better when it is heard by 
no man; and a thousand times better when it is purely mental. 

II. 86. The four domestic sacraments which are accompanied with the 
appointed sacrifice, are not equal though all be united, to a sixteenth 
part of the sacrifice performed by a repetition of the gayatri. 

This investiture is equivalent to a new birth. 

II. 147. Let a man consider that as a mere human birth, which 
his parents gave him for their mutual gratification, and which he 
receives after lying in the womb. 

II. 148. But that birth which his principal acharya, who knows the 
whole Veda, procures for him by his divine mother the gayatri, is a 
true birth; that birth is exempt from age and from death. 

II. 169. The first birth is from a natural mother; the second, from 
the ligation of the zone; the third from the due performance of the 
sacrifice; such are the births of him who is usually called twice-born, 
according to a text of the Veda. 

II. 170. Among them his divine birth is that, which is distinguished 
by the ligation of the zone, and sacrificial cord ; and in that birth the 
Gayatri is his mother, and the Acharya, his father. This sacrament 
is not permitted by Manu to Shudras and to women. 

II. 103. But he who stands not repeating it in the morning, and 
sits not repeating it in the evening, must be precluded, like a Sudra, 
from every sacred observance of the twice born class. 

Manu has not forgotten to mention rules relating to education 
and learning. Manu has nothing to say about mass education. He 
does not see the utility of it and he does not see the necessity of 
imposing any obligation upon the king or the state. He was merely 
concerned with the learning of the sacred and Religious literature 
namely the Vedas. 

Veda must be learned from a preceptor and with his assent. No 
one can read and study the Vedas by himself. He will be guilty of 
theft if he did it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


350 


350 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


II. 116. He who shall acquire knowledge of the Veda without the 
assent of his preceptor, incurs the guilt of stealing the scripture and 
shall sink to the region of torment. 

But others cannot study at all. 

IX. 18. Women have no business with the texts of the Veda; thus 
is the law fully settled; having, therefore, no evidence of law, and no 
knowledge of expiatory texts, sinful women must be as foul as falsehood 
itself; and this is a fixed rule. 

IV. 99. He must never read the Veda without accents and letters well 
pronounced; nor even in the presence of Sudras; nor, having begun to read 
it in the last watch of the night, must he, though fatigued, sleep again. 

This prohibition applies to Vratyas or outcasts from the three higher 
classes. For Manu says: 

II. 40. With such impure men, let no Brahmen, even in distress for 
subsistence, ever form a connexion in law, either by the study of the 
Veda, or by affinity. 

Teaching Veda or performing of sacrifices for disqualified persons was 
prohibited by Manu. 

IV. 205. Never let a priest eat part of a sacrifice not begun with texts 
of the Veda, nor of one performed by a common sacrificer, by a woman, 
or by an eunuch: 

IV. 206. When those persons offer the clarified butter, it brings 
misfortune to good men, and raises aversion in the deities, such oblations, 
therefore, he must carefully shun. 

XI. 198. He, who has officiated at a sacrifice for outcasts, or burned 
the corpse of a stranger, or performed rites to destroy the innocent, or 
made the impure sacrifice, called Ahimsa, may expiate his guilt by three 
prajapatya penances. 

Take equality before Law. 

When they come as witnesses — according to Manu they are to be 
sworn as follows: 

VIII. 87. In the forenoon let the judge, being purified, severally call on 
the twice-born, being purified also, to declare the truth, in the presence 
of some image, a symbol of the divinity, and of Brahmens, while the 
witnesses turn their faces either to the north or to the east. 

VIII. 88. To a Brahmen he must begin with saying, “Declare;” to a 
Kshatriya, with saying, “ Declare the truth ”; to a Vaisya, with comparing 
perjury to the crime of stealing kine, grain, or gold; to a Sudra, with 
comparing it in some or all of the following sentences, to every crime 
that men can commit. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


351 


THE MORALS OF THE HOUSE 351 

VIII. 113. Let the judge cause a priest to swear by his veracity; a soldier, 
by his horse, or elephant, and his weapons; a merchant, by his kine, grain, 
and gold; a mechanic or servile man, by imprecating on his own head, if he 
speak falsely, all possible crime; Manu also deals with cases of witnesses 
giving false evidence. 

According to Manu giving false evidence is a crime. Says Manu: 

VIII. 122. Learned men have specified these punishments, which were 
ordained by sage legislators for perjured witnesses, with a view to prevent 
a failure of justice and to restrain iniquity. 

VIII. 123. Let a just prince banish men of the three lower classes, if they 
give false evidence having first levied the fine; but a Brahmen let him only 
banish.” 

But Manu made one exception: 

VIII. 112. To women, however, at a time of dalliance, or on a proposal 
of marriage, in the case of grass or fruit eaten by a cow, of wood taken for 
a sacrifice, or of a promise made for the preservation of a Brahmen, it is 
deadly sin to take a light oath. As parties to proceedings — Their position 
can be illustrated by quoting the ordinances of Manu relating to a few of 
the important criminal offences dealt with by Manu. 

Take the offence of Defamation. Manu says: 

VIII. 267. A soldier, defaming a priest, shall be fined a hundred panas a 
merchant, thus offending, an hundred and fifty, or two hundred : but, for 
such an offence, a mechanic or servile man shall be whipped. 

VIII. 268. A priest shall be fined fifty, if he slander a soldier; twenty five, 
if a merchant; and twelve, if he slander a man of the servile class. 

Take the offence of Insult — Manu says: 

VIII. 270. A once-born man, who insults the twice-born with gross invectives, 
ought to have his tongue slit; for he sprang from the lowest part of Brahma. 

VIII. 271. If he mention their names and classes with contumely as, if 
he say, “Oh Devadatta, thou refuse of Brahmen”, an iron style, ten fingers 
long, shall be thrust red into his mouth. 

VIII. 272. Should he, through pride, give instruction to priests concerning 
their duty, let the king order some hot oil to be dropped into his mouth 
and his ear. 

Take the offence of Abuse — Manu says: 

VIII. 276. For mutual abuse by a priest and a soldier, this fine must be 
imposed by a learned king; the lowest amercement on the priest, and the 
middle-most on the soldier. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


352 


352 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

VIII. 277 . Such exactly, as before mentioned, must be the punishment 
for a merchant and a mechanic, in respect of their several classes, 
except the slitting of the tongue; this is a fixed rule of punishment. 

Take the offence of Assault — Manu propounds: 

VIII. 279. With whatever member of a low-born man shall assault 
or hurt a superior, even that member of his must be slit, or cut more 
or less in proportion to the injury; this an ordinance of Manu. 

VIII. 280. He who raises his hand or a staff against another, shall 
have his hand cut; and he, who kicks another in wrath, shall have 
an incision made in his foot. 

Take the offence of Arrogance — According to Manu: 

VIII. 281. A man of the lowest class, who shall insolently place 
himself on the same seat with one of the highest, shall either be 
banished with a mark on his hinder parts, or the king shall cause a 
gash to be made on his buttock. 

VIII. 282. Should he spit on him through pride, the king shall 
order both his lips to be gashed; should he urine on him, his penis; 
should he break wind against him, his anus. 

VIII. 283. If he seize the Brahmen by the locks, or by the feet, or 
by the beard, or by the throat, or by the scrotum, let the king without 
hesitation cause incisions to be made in his hands. 

Take the offence of Adultery. Says Manu: 

VIII. 359. A man of the servile class, who commits actual adultery 
with the wife of a priest, ought to suffer death; the wives, indeed, of 
all the four classes must ever be most especially guarded. 

VIII. 366. A low man, who makes love to a damsel of high birth, 
ought to be punished corporally; but he who addresses a maid of equal 
rank, shall give the nuptial present and marry her, if her father please. 

VIII. 374. A mechanic or servile man, having an adulterious 
connection with a woman of a twice-born class, whether guarded at 
home or unguarded, shall thus be punished; if she was unguarded, 
he shall lose the part offending, and his whole substance; if guarded, 
and a priest less, every thing, even his life. 

VIII. 375. For adultery with a guarded priestess, a merchant shall 
forfeit all his wealth after imprisonment for a year; a soldier shall 
be fined a thousand panas, and be shaved with the urine of an ass. 

VIII. 376. But, if a merchant or soldier commit adultery with a 
woman of the sacerdotal class, whom her husband guards not at 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


353 


THE MORALS OF THE HOUSE 353 

home, the king shall only fine the merchant five hundred, and the 
soldier a thousand; 

VIII. 377. Both of them, however, if they commit that offence with 
a priestess not only guarded but eminent for good qualities, shall be 
punished like men of the servile class, or be burned in a fire of dry 
grass or reeds. 

VIII. 382. If a merchant converse criminally with a guarded woman 
of the military, or a soldier with one of the mercantile class, they both 
deserve the same punishment as in the case of a priestess unguarded. 

VIII. 383. But a Brahmen, who shall commit dultery with a guarded 
woman of those two classes, must be fined a thousand panas; and for 
the like offence with a guarded woman of the servile class, the fine of 
a soldier or a merchant shall be also one thousand. 

VIII. 384. For adultery with a woman of the military class, if 
unguarded, the fine of a merchant is five hundred; but a soldier, for 
the converse of that offence, must be shaved with urine, or pay the 
fine just mentioned. 

VIII. 385. A priest shall pay five hundred panas if he connect himself 
criminally with an unguarded woman of the military, commercial, or 
servile class, and a thousand, for such a connexion with a woman of 
vile mixed breed. 

Turning to the system of punishment for offences Manu’s Scheme 
throws an interesting light on the subject. Consider the following 
ordinances: 

VIII. 379. Ignominious tonsure is ordained, instead of capital 
punishment, for an adulterer of the priestly class, where the punishment 
of other classes may extend to loss of life. 

VIII. 380. Never shall the king slay a Brahmen, though convicted 
of all possible crimes; let him banish the offender from his realm, but 
with all his property secure, and his body unhurt. 

XI. 127. For killing intentionally a virtuous man of the military class, 
the penance must a fourth part of that ordained for killing a priest; 
for killing a Vaisya, only an eighth; for killing a Sudra, who had been 
constant in discharging his duties, a sixteenth part. 

XI. 128. But, if a Brahmen kill a Kshatriya without malice, he must, 
after a full performance of his religious rites, give the priests one bull 
together with a thousand cows. 

XI. 129. Or he may perform for three years the penance for slaying 
a Brahmen, mortifying his organs of sensation and action, letting his 
hair grow long, and living remote from the town, with the root of a 
tree for his mansion. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


354 


354 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

XI. 130. If he kill without malice a Vaisya, who had a good moral 
character, he may perform the same penance for one year, or give the 
priests a hundred cows and a bull. 

XI. 131. For six months must he perform this whole penance, if without 
intention he kill a Sudra; or he may give ten white cows and a bull to 
the priests. 

VIII. 381. No greater crime is known on earth than slaying a Brahmen; 
and the king, therefore, must not even form in his mind an idea of killing 
a priest. 

VIII. 126. Let the king having considered and ascertained the frequency 
of a similar offence, the place and time, the ability of the criminal to pay 
or suffer and the crime itself, cause punishment to fall on those alone, 
who deserve it. 

VIII. 124. Manu, son of the Self-existent, has named ten places of 
punishment, which are appropriate to the three lower classes, but a Brahmen 
must depart from the realm unhurt in any one of them. 

VIII. 125. The part of generation, the belly, the tongue, the two hands, 
and, fifthly, the two feet, the eye, the nose, both ears, the property, and, 
in a capital case, the whole body. 

On the point of rights and duties relating to religious Sacraments and 
Sacrifices the views of Manu are noteworthy: 

II. 28. By studying the Veda, by religious observances, by oblations to 
fire, by the ceremony of Traividya, by offering to the Gods and Manes, by 
the procreation of children, by the five great sacraments, and by solemn 
sacrifices, this human body is rendered fit for a divine state. 

III. 69. For the sake of expiating offences committed ignorantly in those 
places mentioned in order, the five great sacrements were appointed by 
eminent sages to be performed each day by such as keep house. 

III. 70. Teaching and studying the scripture is the sacrament of the Veda; 
offering cakes and water, the sacrament of the Manes; an oblation to fire, 
the sacrament of the Deities; giving rice or other food to living creatures, the 
sacrament of spirits; receiving guests with honour, the sacrament of men. 

III. 71. Whoever omits not those five great ceremonies, if he have ability 
to perform them, is untained by the sins of the five slaughtering places, 
even though he constantly reside at home. 

Such are the ordinances of Manu. Laws are never complete enough to 
cover every point. There are always moot questions. Manu was conscious 
of this and provides for such contingencies. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


355 


THE MORALS OF THE HOUSE 355 

XII. 108. If it be asked, how the law shall be ascertained, when 
particular cases are not comprised under any of the general rules, the 
answer is this: “That which well instructed Brahmens propound, shall 
be held incontestible law.” 

XII. 109. Well instructed Brahmens are they, who can adduce occular 
proof from the scripture itself, having studied, as the law ordains, the 
Vedas and their extended branches, or Vedangas, Mimansa, Nyaya, 
Dharma, Shastra, Puranas. 

XII. 113. Even the decision of one priest, if more cannot be assembled, 
who perfectly knows the principles of the Vedas, must be considered 
as law of the highest authority; not the opinion of myriads, who have 
no sacred knowledge. 

The Laws of Manu are eternal. Therefore there is no question of 
considering how changes could be effected in them. The only question 
Manu had to consider was the upholding and maintaining the system. 
Manu has laid down several provisions with this purpose in view. As 
to the preservation of the Social Code, Manu has made it the duty of 
the King to uphold and maintain: 

VIII. 410. The king should order each man of the mercantile class 
to practice trade, or money lending, or agriculture and attendance on 
cattle; and each man of the servile class to act in the service of the 
twice-born. 

VIII. 418. With vigilant care should the king exert himself in 
compelling merchants and mechanics to perform their respective duties; 
for, when such men swerve from their duty, they throw this world into 
confusion. 

Failure to maintain was made an offence in the King punishable at 
Law. 


VIII. 335. Neither a father, nor a preceptor, nor a friend, nor a mother, 
nor a wife, nor a son, nor a domestic priest must be left unpunished 
by the king, if they adhere not with firmness to their duty. 

VIII. 336. Where another man of lower birth would be fined one 
pana, the king shall be fined a thousand, and he shall give the fine to 
the priests, or cast it into the river, this is a sacred rule. 

Failure to uphold and maintain the system on the part of the king 
involved a forfeiture of his right to rule. For Manu allows a right to 
rebel against, such a King. 

VIII. 348. The twice-born may take arms, when their duty is obstructed 
by force; and when, in some evil time, a disaster has befallen the twice- 
born classes. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


356 


356 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The right of rebellion is given to the three higher classes and not to the 
Shudra. This is very natural. Because it is only the three upper classes 
who would benefit by the maintenance of this system. But supposing 
the Kshatriyas joined the King in destroying the system what is to 
be done? Manu gives the authority to the Brahmins to punish all and 
particularly the Kshatriyas. 

XI. 31. A priest, who well knows the laws, need not complain to the 
king of any grievious injury; since, even by his own power, he may 
chastise those, who injure him. 

XI. 32. His own power, which depends on himself alone, is mightier 
than the royal power, which depends on other men; by his own might, 
therefore, may a Brahman coerce his foes. 

XI. 33. He may use, without hesitation, the powerful charms revealed 
to Atharvan, and by him to Angiras; for speech is the weapon of a 
Brahmen; with that he may destroy his oppressors. 

IX. 320. Of a military man, who raises his arm violently on all occasions 
against the priestly class, the priest himself shall be the chastiser; since 
the soldier originally proceeded from the Brahmen.” 

How can the Brahmins punish the Kshatriyas unless they can take 
arms? Manu knows this and therefore allows the Brahmins to arm 
themselves to punish the Kshatriyas. 

XII. 100. Command of armies, royal authority, power of inflicting 
punishment, and sovereign dominion over all nations, he only well 
deserves, who perfectly understands the Veda Shastra. 

So intent is Manu on the maintenance of the system of Chaturvarna 
that he did not hesitate to make this fundamental change in it. For to 
ask a Brahman to take up arms is a fundamental change as compared 
with the rule that was prevalent before Manu. The prohibition against 
Brahmin handling arms was very strict. In the Apastamba Dharma Sutras 
which is prior to Manu the rule is laid down in the following terms: 

I. 10, 29, 6. A Brahmin shall not take up a weapon in his hand’ 
though he be only desirous of examining it.” 

Successor of Manu — Baudhayana — improved upon him, and laid down 
in his Code of Laws: 

II. 24, 18. For the protection of the Cows, Brahmins, or in the case 
of the confusion of Varnas, Brahmins and Vaisyas (also) should take up 
arms, out of consideration for the Dharma. and maintain the system 
at any cost. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


357 


CHAPTER 13 

Essays on the Bhagwat Gita: 
Philosophic Defence of Counter- 
Revolution: 

Krishna and His Gita 

The first page of ‘Essays on the Bhagvat Gita’ is autographed 
by Dr. Ambedkar, Next 42 pages consist of analytical notes on 
Viral Parva and Uddyog Parva including the table of contents on 
this subject. The table of contents is printed in the schemes. This 
file contains two typed copies of an essay entitled Philosophic 
Defence of Counter-Revolution — Krishna and His Gita’. The last 
sentence of this essay is left incomplete. The total number of 
typed pages of this essay is 40 only. The notes on Viral Parva 
& Udyog Parva are printed in the next chapters. — Editors. 

What is the place of the Bhagwat Gita in the literature of ancient 
India? Is it a gospel of the Hindu Religion in the same way as the Bible 
is of the Christian Religion? The Hindus have come to regard it as their 
gospel. If it is a gospel, what does it really teach? What is the doctrine 
it stands for? The variety of answers given to this question by students 
competent to speak on the subject is really bewildering. Bohtlingk 1 says: 

“The Gita contains by the side of many high and beautiful thoughts, 
not only a few weak points; contradictions (which the commentators have 
tried to pass over as excusable), repetitions, exaggerations, absurdities 
and loathsome points.” 

“Hopkins 2 speaks of the Bhagvat Gita as a characteristic work of the 
Hindu Literature in its sublimity as in its puerilities, in its logic as in its 
want of it; an ill-assorted cabinet of primitive philosophical opinions.” 

In his judgment: 

1 Quoted by Garbe in his Introduction to the Bhagvat Gita (Indian Antiquary 1918 
Supplement). 

2 . Religion of India pp. 390-400. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


358 


358 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

“Despite its occasional power and music exaltation, the Divine 
song in its present state as a poetical production is unsatisfactory. 
The same thing is said over again, and the contradictions in 
phraseology and in meaning are as numerous as the repetitions, 
so that one is not surprised to find it described as “the wonderful 
song, which causes the hair to stand on end.” 

Holtzman 1 says: 

“We have before us (in the Bhagvat Gita) a Vishnuite revision 
of a pantheistic poem.” 

Garbe 2 observes: 

“The whole character of the poem in its design and execution is 
preponderatingly theistic. A personal God Krishna stands forth in 
the form of a human hero, expounds his doctrine, enjoins, above all 
things, on his listener, along with the performance of his duties, 

loving faith in Him and self-surrender: And by the side of 

this God — (who is) delineated as personally as possible, and who 
dominates the whole poem — stands out frequently the impersonal 
neutral Brahman, the Absolute, as the highest principle. At one 
time Krishna says that He is the sole Highest God who has created 
the world and all beings and rules over it all; at another time, he 
expounds the Vedantic doctrine of Brahman and maya — the Cosmic 
Illusion, and expounds as the highest goal of human being that 
he be freed from the World-Illusion and become Brahman. These 
two doctrines — the theistic and the pantheistic — are mixed up with 
each other, and follow each other, sometimes quite unconnected 
and sometimes loosely connected. And it is not the case that the 
one is represented as a lower, exoteric, (Text p. 9) and, (p. ) as the 
higher esoteric doctrine. It is nowhere taught that the Theism is 
a preliminary step to the knowledge of the reality or that it is its 
symbol, and that the pantheism of the Vedanta is the (ultimate) 
reality itself; but the two beliefs are treated of almost throughout 
as though there was indeed no difference between them, either 
verbal or real.” 

Mr. Telang says : 3 

“There are several passages in the Gita which it is not very easy 
to reconcile with one another; and no attempt is made to harmonise 
them. Thus, for example, in stanza 16 of Chapter VII, Krishna 
divides his devotees into four classes, one of which consists of ‘men 
of knowledge’, whom, Krishna says, he considers ‘as his own self. 
It would probably be difficult to imagine any expression which 


Quoted by Garbe. 

Introduction to Bhagvat Gita. 

Bhagvat Gita (S.E.B.) Introduction p. II. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


359 


KRISHNA AND HIS GITA 

could indicate higher esteem. Yet in stanza 46 of chapter VI, 
we have it laid down, that the devotee is superior not only 
to the mere performer of penances, but even to the men of 
knowledge. The commentators betray their gnostic bias by 
interpreting ‘men of knowledge’ in this latter passage to mean 
those who have acquired erudition in the Shastras and their 
significations. This is not an interpretation to be necessarily 
rejected. But there is in it a certain twisting of words, which, 
under the circumstances here, I am not inclined to accept. And 
on the other hand, it must not be forgotten, that the implications 
fairly derivable from Chapter IV, stanza 39 (pp. 62, 63), would 
seem to be rather than knowledge is superior to devotion — is the 
higher stage to be reached by means of devotion as the stepping 
stone. In another passage again at Gita, Chapter XII, stanza 12, 
concentration is preferred to knowledge, which also seems to 
me to be irreconcileable with Chapter VII, stanza 16. Take still 
another instance. At Gita, Chapter B stanza 15, it is said, that 
‘Lord receives the sin or merit of none.’ Yet at Chapter V, stanza 
24 Krishna calls himself ‘the Lord and enjoyer,’ of all sacrifices 
and penances. How, it may be well asked, can the Supreme 
Being ‘enjoy that which he does not even receive?’ Once more 
at Chapter X, stanza 29, Krishna declares that’ none is hateful 
to me, none dear.’ And yet the remarkable verse at the close of 
Chapter XII seem to stand in pointblank contradiction to that 
declaration. There through a most elaborate series of stanzas, 
the burden of Krishna’s eloquent sermon is ‘such a one is dear 
to me.’ And again in those fine verses, where Krishna winds up 
his Divine Law, he similarly tells Arjuna, that he, Arjuna, is 
‘dear’ to Krishna. And Krishna also speaks of that devotee as 
‘dear’ to him, who may publish the mystery of the Gita among 
those who references Supreme Being. 1 And yet again, how are we 
to reconcile the same passage about none being ‘hateful or dear’ 
to Krishna, with his own words at Chapter XVI, stanza 18 and 
following stanzas? The language used in describing the ‘demoniac’ 
people there mentioned is not remarkable for sweetness towards 
them, while Krishna says positively, ‘I hurl down such people 
into demoniac wombs, whereby they go down into misery and the 
vilest condition.’ These persons are scarcely characterized with 
accuracy ‘as neither hateful nor dear’ to Krishna. It seems to 
me, that all these are real inconsistencies in the Gita, not such, 
perhaps, as might not be explained away, but such, I think, as 
indicate a mind making guesses at truth, as Professor Max Muller 
puts it, rather than a mind elaborating a complete and organized 


359 


lAnd see, too, Chapter VII, stanza 17, where the man of knowledge is declared to he 
‘dear’ to Krishna. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


360 


360 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

system of philosophy. There is not even a trace of consciousness on the 
part of the author that these inconsistencies exist. And the contexts 
of the various pasages indicate, in my judgment, that a half-truth is 
struck out here and another half-truth there, with special reference 
to the special subject then under discussion; but no attempt is made 
to organize the various half-truths which are apparently incompatible, 
into a symmeterical whole, where the apparent inconsistencies might 
possibly vanish altogether in the higher synthesis.” 

These are the views of what might be called modern scholars. 
Turning to the view of the orthodox Pandits, we again find a variety 
of views. One view is that the Bhagvat is not a sectarian book, it 
pays equal respect to the three ways of salvation (1) Karma marge or 
the path of works (2) Bhakti marga or the path of devotion and (3) 
J nana marga or the path of knowledge and preaches the efficacy of 
all three as means of salvation. In support of their contention that the 
Gita respects all the three ways of salvation and accepts the efficacy 
of each one of them, the Pandits point out that of the 18 Chapters of 
the Bhagvat Gita, Chapters 1 to 6 are devoted to the preaching of the 
J nana marga, Chapters 7 to 12 to the preaching of Karma marga and 
Chapters 12 to 18 to the preaching of Bhakti marga and say that this 
equal distribution of its Chapters shows that the Gita upholds all the 
three modes of salvation. 

Quite contrary to the view of the Pandits is the view of Shankaracharya 
and Mr. Tilak, both of whom must be classed amongst orthodox writers. 
Shankaracharya held the view that the Bhagvat Gita preached that 
the Jnana marga was the only true way of salvation. Mr. Tilak 1 does 
not agree with the views of any of the other scholars. He repudiates 
the view that the Gita is a bundle of inconsistencies. He does not 
agree with the Pandits who say that the Bhagvat Gita recognizes all 
the three ways of salvation. Like Shankaracharya he insists that the 
Bhagvat Gita has a definite doctrine to preach. But he differs from 
Shankaracharya and holds that the Gita teaches Karma Yoga and not 
Jnana Yoga. 

It cannot but be a matter of great surprise to find such a variety of 
opinion as to the message which the Bhagvat Gita preaches. One is 
forced to ask why there should be such divergence of opinion among 
scholars? My answer to this question is that scholars have gone on 
a false errand. They have gone on a search for the message of the 
Bhagvat Gita on the assumption that it is a gospel as the Koran, the 
Bible or the Dhammapada is. In my opinion this assumption is quite 


See His Gita Rahasya 2nd editions vol. II. Chapter XIV. passim. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


361 


KRISHNA AND HIS GITA 361 

a false assumption. The Bhagvat Gita is not a gospel and it can therefore 
have no message and it is futile to search for one. The question will no 
doubt be asked: What is the Bhagvat Gita if it is not a gospel? My answer 
is that the Bhagvat Gita is neither a book of religion nor a treatise on 
philosophy. What the Bhagvat Gita does is to defend certain dogmas 
of religion on philosphic grounds. If on that account anybody wants to 
call it a book of religion or a book of philosophy he may please himself. 
But essentially it is neither. It uses philosophy to defend religion. My 
opponents will not be satisfied with a bare statement of view. They 
would insist on my proving my thesis by reference to specific instances. 
It is not at all difficult. Indeed it is the easiest task. 

The first instance one comes across in reading the Bhagvat Gita is the 
justification of war. Arjuna had declared himself against the war, against 
killing people for the sake of property. Krishna offers a philosophic defence 
of war and killing in war. This philosophic defence of war will be found 
in Chapter II verses 11 to 28. The philosophic defence of war offered 
by the Bhagvat Gita proceeds along two lines of argument. One line of 
argument is that anyhow the world is perishable and man is mortal. 
Things are bound to come to an end. Man is bound to die. Why should 
it make any difference to the wise whether man dies a natural death 
or whether he is done to death as a result of violence? Life is unreal, 
why shed tears because it has ceased to be? Death is inevitable, why 
bother how it has resulted ? The second line of argument in justification 
of war is that it is a mistake to think that the body and the soul are 
one. They are separate. Not only are the two quite distinct but they 
differ in-as-much as the body is perishable while the soul is eternal and 
imperishable. When death occurs it is the body that dies. The soul never 
dies. Not only does it never die but air cannot dry it, fire cannot burn 
it, and a weapon cannot cut it. It is therefore wrong to say that when a 
man is killed his soul is killed. What happens is that his body dies. His 
soul discards the dead body as a person discards his old clothes — wears 
a new ones and carries on. As the soul is never killed, killing a person 
can never be a matter of any movement. War and killing need therefore 
give no ground to remorse or to shame, so argues the Bhagvat Gita. 

Another dogma to which the Bhagvat Gita comes forward to offer 
a philosophic defence is Chaturvarnya. The Bhagvat Gita, no doubt, 
mentions that the Chaturvarnya is created by God and therefore 
sacrosanct. But it does not make its validity dependent on it. It offers 
a philosophic basis to the theory of Chaturvarnya by linking it to the 
theory of innate, inborn qualities in men. The fixing of the Varna of 

1 And see, too, Chapter VII, stanza 17, where the man of knowledge is declared to be 
‘dear’ to Krishna. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


362 


362 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

man is not an arbitrary act says the Bhagvat Gita. But it is fixed 
according to his innate, inborn qualities . 1 

The third dogma for which the Bhagvat Gita offers a philosphic defence 
is the Karma marga. By Karma marga the Bhagvat Gita means the 
performance of the observances, such as Yajnas as a way to salvation. 
The Bhagvat Gita most stands out for the Karma marga throughout 
and is a great upholder of it. The line it takes to defend Karma yoga is 
by removing the excrescences which had grown upon it and which had 
made it appear quite ugly. The first excrescence was blind faith. The 
Gita tries to remove it by introducing the principle of Buddhi yoga 2 as a 
necessary condition for Karma yoga. Become Stihtaprajna i.e., ‘Befitted 
with Buddhi’ there is nothing wrong in the performance of Karma kanda. 
The second excrescence on the Karma kanda was the selfishness which 
was the motive behind the performance of the Karmas. The Bhagvat 
Gita attempts to remove it by introducing the principle of Anasakti 
i.e., performance of karma without any attachment for the fruits of the 
Karma . 3 Founded in Buddhi yoga and dissociated from selfish attachment 
to the fruits of Karma what is wrong with the dogma of Karma kand ? 
this is how the Bhagvat Gita defends the Karma marga . 4 It would be 
quite possible to continue in this strain, to pick up other dogmas and 
show how the Gita comes forward to offer a philosophic defence in their 
support where none existed before. But this could be done only if one 
were to write a treatise on the Bhagvat Gita, it is beyond the scope of a 
chapter the main purpose of which is to assign to the Bhagvat Gita its 
proper place in the ancient Indian literature. I have therefore selected 
the most important dogmas just to illustrate my thesis. 

Two other questions are sure to be asked in relation to my thesis. 
Whose are the Dogmas for which the Bhagvat Gita offers this philosophical 
defence? Why did it become necessary for the Bhagvat Gita to defend 
these Dogmas? 

To begin with the first question, the dogmas which the Gita defends 
are the dogmas of counter-revolution as put forth in the Bible of 
counter-revolution namely Jaimini’s Purvamimamsa. There ought 
to be no difficulty in accepting this proposition. If there is any it is 
largely due to wrong meaning attached to the word Karma yoga. Most 
writers on the Bhagvat Gita translate the word Karma yoga as ‘action’ 
and the word Janga yoga, as ‘knowledge’ and proceed to discuss the 
Bhagvat Gita as though it was engaged in comparing and contrasting 

1 Bhagvat Gita IV. 13. 

2 Bhagvat Gita II. 39-53 

3 Bhagvat Gita II. 47. 

4 This is well summed up in Bhagvat Gita II. 48. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


363 


KRISHNA AND HIS GITA 363 

knowledge versus action in a generlized form. This is quite wrong. 
The Bhagvat Gita is not concerned with any general, philosophical 
discussion of action versus knowledge. As a matter of fact, the Gita is 
concerned with the particular and not with the general. By Karma yoga 
or action Gita means the dogmas contained in Jaimini’s Karma kanda 
and by Jnana yoga or knowledge it means the dogmas contained in 
Badarayana’s Brahma Sutras. That the Gita in speaking of Karma is 
not speaking of activity or inactivity, quieticism or energism, in general 
terms but religious acts and observances cannot be denied by anyone 
who has read the Bhagvat Gita. It is to life the Gita from the position 
of a party pamphlet engaged in a controversy on small petty points and 
make it appear as though it was a general treatise on matters of high 
philosophy that this attempt is made to inflate the meaning of the words 
Karma and Jnana and make them words of general import. Mr. Tilak 
is largely to be blamed for this trick of patriotic Indians. The result 
has been that these false meanings have misled people into believing 
that the Bhagvat Gita is an independent self-contained book and has no 
relation to the literature that has preceded it. But if one were to keep 
to the meaning of the word Karma yoga as one finds it in the Bhagvat 
Gita itself one would be convinced that in speaking of Karma yoga the 
Bhagvat Gita is referring to nothing but the dogmas of Karma kanda 
as propounded by Jaimini which it tries to renovate and strengthen. 

To take up the second question: Why did the Bhagvat Gita feel it 
necessary to defend the dogmas of counter-revolution? To my mind 
the answer is very clear. It was to save them from the attack of 
Buddhism that the Bhagvat Gita came into being. Buddha preached 
non-violence. He not only preached it but the people at large — except 
the Brahmins — had acepted it as the way of life. They had acquired 
a repugnance to violence. Buddha preached against Chaturvarnya. 
He used some of the most offensive similes in attacking the theory 
of Chaturvarnya. The frame work of Chaturvarnya had been broken. 
The order of Chaturvarnya had been turned upside down. Shudras 
and women could become sannyasis, a status which counter-revolution 
had denied them. Buddha had condemned the Karma kanda and the 
Yajnas. He condemned them on the ground of Himsa or violence. He 
condemned them also on the ground that the motive behind them was 
a selfish desire to obtain bonus. What was the reply of the counter- 
revolutionaries to this attack? Only this. These things were ordained 
by the Vedas, the Vedas were infallible, therefore the dogmas were not 
to be questioned. In the Buddhist age, which was the most enlightened 
and the most rationalistic age India has known, dogmas resting on 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


364 


364 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

such silly, arbitrary, unrationalistic and fragile foundations could hardly 
stand. People who had come to believe in non-violence as a principle of 
life and had gone so far as to make it a rule of life — How could they 
be expected to accept the dogma that the Kshatriya may kill without 
sinning because the Vedas say that it is his duty to kill ? People who 
had accepted the gospel of social equality and who were remaking 
society on the basis of each one according to his merits — how could 
they accept the chaturvarnya theory of gradation, and separation of 
man based on birth simply because the Vedas say so ? People who 
had accepted the doctrine of Buddha that all misery in society is due 
to Tanha or what Tawny calls acquisitive instinct — how could they 
accept the religion which deliberatly invited people to obtain boons 
by sacrifices merely because there is behind it the authority of the 
Vedas? There is no doubt that under the furious attack of Buddhism, 
Jaimini’s counter-revolutionary dogmas were tottering and would 
have collapsed had they not received the support which the Bhagvat 
Gita gave them. The philosophic defence of the counter-revolutionary 
doctrines given by the Bhagwat Gita is by no means impregnable. 
The philosophic defence offered by the Bhagvat Gita of the Kshtriya’s 
duty to kill is to say the least puerile. To say that killing is no killing 
because what is killed is the body and not the soul is an unheard of 
defence of murder. This is one of the doctrines which make some people 
say that the doctrines make one’s hair stand on their end. If Krishna 
were to appear as a lawyer acting for a client who is being tried for 
murder and pleaded the defence set out by him in the Bhagvat Gita 
there is not the slightest doubt that he would be sent to the lunatic 
asylum. Similarly childish is the defence of the Bhagvat Gita of the 
dogma of chaturvarnya. Krishna defends it on the basis of the Guna 
theory of the Sankhya. But Krishna does not seem to have realized 
what a fool he has made of himself. In the chaturvarnya there are 
four Varnas. But the gun as according to the Sankhy as are only 
three. How can a system of four varnas be defended on the basis of 
a philosophy which does not recognise more than three varnas? The 
whole attempt of the Bhagvat Gita to offer a philosophic defence of 
the dogmas of counterrevolution is childish — and does not deserve a 
moment’s serious thought. None-the-less there is not the slightest doubt 
that without the, help of the Bhagvat Gita the counter-revolution would 
have died out, out of sheer stupidity of its dogmas. Mischievous as it 
may seem, to the revolutionaries the part played by the Bhagvat Gita, 
there is no doubt that it resuscitated counter-revolution and if the 
counterrevolution lives even today, it is entirely due to the plausibility of 
the philosophic defence which it received from the Bhagvat Gita — anti- 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


365 


KRISHNA AND HIS GITA 365 

Veda and anti-Yajna. Nothing can be a greater mistake than this. As 
will appear from other portions of the Bhagvat Gita that it is not against 
the authority of the vedas and shastras (XVI, 23, 24: XVII, 11,13, 24). 
Nor is it against the sanctity of the yajnas (III. 9-15). It upholds the 
virtue of both. There is therefore no difference between Jaimini’s Purva 
Mimansa and the Bhagvat Gita. If anything, the Bhagvat Gita is a 
more formidable supporter of counter-revolution than Jaimini’s Purva 
Mimansa could have ever been. It is formidable because it seeks to give 
to the doctrines of counter-revolution that philosophic and therefore 
permanent basis which they never had before and without which they 
would never have survived. Particularly formidable than Jaimini’s Purva 
Mimansa is the philosophic support which the Bhagvat Gita gives to 
the central doctrine of counter-revolution — namely Chaturvarnya. The 
soul of the Bhagvat Gita seems to be the defence of Chaturvarnya 
and securing its observance in practice, Krishna does not merely rest 
content with saying that Chaturvarnya is based on Guna-karma but 
he goes further and issues two positive injunctions. The first injunction 
is contained in Chapter III verse 26. In this Krishna says: that a wise 
man should not by counter propaganda create a doubt in the mind 
of an ignorant person who is follower of Karma kand which of course 
includes the observance of the rules of Chaturvarnya. In other words, 
you must not agitate or excite people to rise in rebellion against the 
theory of Karma kand and all that it includes. The second injunction 
is laid down in Chapter XVIII verses 41-48. In this Krishna tells that 
every one do the duty prescribed for his Varna and no other and warns 
those who worship him and are his devotees that they will not obtain 
salvation by mere devotion but by devotion accompanied by observance 
of duty laid down for his Varna. In short, a Shudra however great he 
may be as a devotee will not get salvation if he has transgressed the 
duty of the Shudra — namely to live and die in the service of the higher 
classes. The second part of my thesis is that the essential function of the 
Bhagvat gita to give new support to Jaimini at least those portions of 
it which offer philosophic defence of Jaimini’s doctrines — has become to 
be written after Jaimini’s Purva Mimansa had been promulgated. The 
third part of my thesis is that this philosophic defence of the Bhagvat 
Gita, of the doctrines of couter-revolution became necessary because 
of the attack to which they were subjected by the revolutionary and 
rationalistic thought of Buddhism. 

I must now turn to the objections that are likely to be raised against 
the validity of my thesis. I see one looming large before me. I shall be 
told that I am assuming that the Bhagvat Gita is posterior in time to 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


366 


366 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Buddhism and to Jaimini’s Purva Mimansa and that this asumption has 
no warrant behind it. I am aware of the fact that my thesis runs counter 
to the most cherished view of Indian scholars all of whom, seem to be 
more concerned in fixing a very ancient date to the compositon of the 
Bhagvat Gita far anterior to Buddhism and to Jaimini than in finding 
out what is the message of the Bhagvat Gita and what value it has as 
a guide to man’s life. This is particularly the case with Mr. Telang and 
Mr. Tilak. But as Garbe 1 observes “To Telang, as to every Hindu — how 
much so ever enlightened — it is an article of faith to believe in so high 
an antiquity of the Bhagvat Gita and where such necessities are powerful 
criticism indeed comes to an end.” 

In the words of Prof. Garbe: 

“The task of assigning a date to the Gita has been recognized by every 
one who has earnestly tried to solve the problem, as being very difficult; 
and the difficulties grow (all the more) if the problem is presented two 
fold, viz., to determine as well the age of the original Gita as also of 
its revision. I am afraid that generally speaking, we shall succeed in 
arriving, not at any certainties, but only at probabilities in this matter.” 

What are the probabilities? I have no doubt that the probabilities 
are in favour of my thesis. Indeed so far as I can see there is nothing 
against it. In examining this question, I propose first to advance direct 
evidence from the Gita itself showing that it has been composed after 
Jaimini’s Purva Mimansa and after Buddhism. 

Chapter III verses 9-13 of the Bhagvat Gita have a special significance. 
In this connection it is true that the Bhagvat Gita does not refer to 
Jaimini by name: nor does it mention Mimansa by name. But is there 
any doubt that in Chapter III verses 9-18 the Bhagvat Gita is dealing 
with the doctrines formulated by Jaimini in his Purva Mimansa? 
Even Mr. Tilak 2 who believes in the antiquity of the Bhagvat Gita 
has to admit that here the Gita is engaged in the examination of 
the Purva Mimansa doctrines. There is another way of presenting 
this argument. Jaimini preaches pure and simple Karma yoga. The 
Bhagvat Gita on the other hand preaches anasakti karma. Thus the 
Guta preaches a doctrine which is fundamentally modified Not only 
the Bhagvat Gita modifies the Karma yoga but attacks the upholders 
of pure and simple Karma yoga in somewhat severe terms. 3 . If the 
Gita is prior to Jaimini one would expect Jaimini to take note of this 
attack of the Bhagvat Gita and reply to it. But we do not find any; 
reference in Jaimini to this anasakti karma yoga of the Bhagvat Gita. 

1 Introduction (Indian Antiquary Supplement) p. 30. 

2 Gita Rahasya Vol. II. 916-922. 

3 Bhagvat Gita II. 42-16 and XVIII 66. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


367 


KRISHNA AND HIS GITA 367 

Why? The only answer is that this modification came after Jaimini and 
not before — which is simply another way of saying that the Bhagvat 
Gita was composed after Jaimini’s Purva Mimansa. 

If the Bhagvat Gita does not mention Purva Mimansa it does mention 
by name the Brahma Sutras 1 of Badarayana. This reference to Brahma 
Sutras is a matter of great significance for it furnishes direct evidence 
for the conclusion that the Gita is later than the Brahma Sutras. 

Mr. Tilak 2 admits that the reference to the Brahma Sutras is a 
clear and defniite reference to the treatise of that name which we now 
have. It may be pointed out that Mr. Telang 3 discusses the subject in a 
somewhat cavalier fashion by saying that the treatise “Brahma Sutras” 
referred to in the Bhagvat Gita is different from the present treatise 
which goes by that name. He gives no evidence for so extraordinary a 
proposition but relies on the Conjectural statement of Mr. Weber 4 — given 
in a foot-note of his Treatise in Indian Literature, again without any 
evidence — that the mention of Brhma Sutras in the Bhagvat Gita “may 
be taken as an appellative rather than as a proper name.” It would not 
be fair to attribute any particular motives to Mr. Telang for the view 
he has taken on this point. But there is nothing unfair in saying that 
Mr. Telang 3 shied at admitting the reference to Brahma Sutra because 
he saw that Weber had on the authority of Winternitz assigned 500 A.D. 
to the composition of the Brahma Sutras, which would have destroyed 
his cherished theory regarding the antiquity of the Bhagvat Gita. There 
is thus ample internal evidence to support the conclusion that the Gita 
was composed after Jaimini’s Purva Mimansa and Badarayana’s Brahma 
Sutras. 

Is the Bhagvat Gita anterior to Buddhism ? the question was raised 
by Mr. Telang: 

“We come now to another point. What is the position of the Gita 
in regard to the great reform of Sakya Muni? The question is one 
of much interest, having regard particularly to the remarkable 
coincidences between Buddhistic doctrines and the doctrines of 
the Gita to which we have drawn attention in the footnotes to our 
translation. But the materials for deciding the question are unhappily 
not forth coming. Professor Wilson, indeed, thought that there was 

1 Bhagwat Gita XIII. 4 

2 Gita Rahasya II. p. 749. 

3 Bhagvat Gita (S.B.E.) Introduction p. 31. 

4 History of Indian Literature p. 242 f.n. 

5 On the other hand, it may be said that Mr. Tilak readily admitted the reference because it 
was his opinion that Brahma Sutras were a very ancient treatise — see Gita Rahasya Vol. II. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


368 


368 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

an allusion to Buddhism in the Gita . 1 But his idea was based on a 
confusion between the Buddhists and the Charvakas or materialists . 2 
Failing that allusion, we have nothing very tangible but the unsatisfactory 
‘negative argument’ based on mere non-mention of Buddhism in the 
Gita. That argument is not quite satisfactory to my own mind, although, 
as I have elsewhere pointed out , 3 some of the ground occupied by the 
Gita is common to it with Buddhism, and although various previous 
thinkers are alluded to directly or indirectly in the Gita. There is, 
however, one view of the facts of this question, which appears to me to 
corroborate the conclusion deducible by means of the negative argument 
here referred to. The main points on which Budddha’s protest against 
Brahmanism rests, seem to be the true authority of the Vedas and 
the true view of the differences of caste. On most points of doctrinal 
speculation. Buddhism is still but one aspect of the older Brahmanism 4 . 
The various coincidences to which we have drawn attention show that, 
if there is need to show it. Well now, on both these points, the Gita, 
while it does not go the whole length which Buddha goes, itself embodies 
a protest against the views current about the time of its composition. 
The Gita does not, like Buddhism, absolutely reject the Vedas, but it 
shelves them. The Gita does not totally root out caste. It places caste 
on a less untenable basis. One of two hypothesis therefore presents 
itself as a rational theory of these facts. Either the Gita and Buddhism 
were alike the outward manifestation of one and the same spiritual 
upheaval which shook to its centre the current religion, the Gita being 
the earlier and less thorough going form of it; or Buddhism having 
already begun to tell on Brahmanism, the Gita was an attempt to 
bolster it up, so to say, at its least weak points, the weaker ones being 
altogether abandoned. I do not accept the latter alternative, because I 
cannot see any indication in the Gita of an attempt to compromise with 
a powerful attack on the old Hindu system while the fact that, though 
strictly orthodox, the author of the Gita still undermines the authority, 
as unwisely venerated, of the Vedic revelation; and the further fact, that 
in doing this, he is doing what others also had done before him or about 
his time; go, in my opinion, a considerable way towards fortifying the 
results of the negative argument already set forth. To me Buddhism 
is perfectly intelligible as one outcome of that play of thought on high 


1 Essays on Sanskrit Literature. Vo. Ill p. 150. 

2 See our remarks on this point in the Introductory Essay to our Gita in verse p. II seq. 

3 Introduction to Gita in English verse p. v. seq, 

4 Cr. Max Muller’s Hibbert Lectures, p. 137 Webet’s Indian Literature, pp. 288, 289: 
and Rhys Davids’ excellent little volume on Buddhism, p. 151; and see also p. 83 of 
Mr. Davids’ book. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


369 


KRISHNA AND HIS GITA 369 

spiritual topics, which in its other, and as we may say, less thorough going, 
manifestation we see in the Upanishads and the Gita 1 .” 

I have quoted this passage in full because it is typical of all Hindu scholars. 
Everyone of them is most reluctant to admit that the Bhagvat Gita is anyway 
influenced by Buddhism and is ever ready to deny that the Gita has borrowed 
anything from Buddhism. It is the attitude of Prof. Radhakrishnan and also 
of Tilak. Where there is any similarity in thought between the Bhagvat Gita 
and Buddhism too strong and too close to be denied, the argument is that it 
is borrowed from the Upanishads. It is typical of the mean mentality of the 
counterrevolutionaries not to allow any credit to Buddhism on any account. 

The absurdity of these views must shock all those who have made a 
comparative study of the Bhagvat Gita and the Buddhist Suttas. For if it is 
true to say that Gita is saturated with Sankhya philosophy it is far more 
true to say that the Gita is full of Buddhist ideas. 2 The similarity between 
the two is not merely in ideas but also in language. A few illustrations will 
show how true it is. 

The Bhagvat Gita discusses Bramha-Nirvana. 3 The steps by which 
one reaches Bramha. Nirvana are stated by the Bhagvat Gita to be 
(1) Shraddha (Faith in oneself); (2) Vyavasaya (Firm determination); 
(3) Smriti (Rememberance of the goal); (4) Samadhi (Earnest contemplation) 
and (5) Prajna (Insight or True Knowledge). From where has the Gita borrowed 
this Nirvana theory? Surely it is not borrowed from the Upanishads. For no 
Upanishad even mentions the word Nirvana. The whole idea is peculiarly 
Buddhist and is borrowed from Buddhism. Anyone who has any doubt on 
the point may compare this Bramha-Nirvana of the Bhagvat Gita with the 
Buddhist conception of Nirvana as set out in the Mahapari-nibbana Sutta. 
It will be found that they are the same which the Gita has laid down for 
Bramha-Nirvana. Is it not a fact that the Bhagvat Gita has borrowed the 
entire conception of Brmhma Nirvana instead of Nirvana for no other reason 
except to conceal the fact of its having stolen it from Buddhism ? 

Take another illustration. In Chapter VII verses 13-20 there is a 
discussion as to who is dear to Krishna; one who has knowledge, or one 
who performs karma or one who is a devotee. Krishna says that the 
Devotees is dear to him but adds that he must have the true marks 

1 Cr. Weber’s History of Indian Literature, p. 285. In Mr. Davids’ Buddhism, p. 94 we 
have a noteworthy extract from a standard Buddhistic work, touching the existence of 
the soul. Compare that with the corresponding doctrine in the Gita. It will be found that 
the two are at one in rejecting the identity of the soul with the senses &c. The Gita then 
goes on to admit a soul separate from these. Buddhism rejects that also, and sees nothing 
but the senses. 

2 On this point compare Bhagvat Gita by S. D. Budhiraja M.A.. L.L.B.. Chief Judge, 
Kashmere. At every point the author has attempted to draw attention to textual similarities 
between the Gita and Buddhism. 

3 Max Muller Mahapari-Nibbana Sutta p. 63. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


370 


370 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

of a Devotee. What is the charcter of a true Devotee ? According 
to Krishna the true devotee is one who practices (1) Maitri; (loving 
Kindness); (2) Karuna (compassion); (3) Mudita (sympathizing joy) 
and (4) Upeksa (unconcernedness). From where has the Bhagvate 
Gita borrowed these qualifications of a perfect Devotee ? Here 
again, the source is Buddhism. Those who want proof may compare 
the Mahapadana Sutta, 1 and the Tevijja Sutta 2 where Buddha has 
preached what Bhavanas (mental attitude) are necessary for one 
to cherish for the training of the heart. This comparison will show 
that the whole ideology is borrowed from Buddhism and that too 
word for word. 

Take a third illustration. In chapter XIII the Bhagvat Gita descusses 
the subject of Kshetra-Kshetrajna. In verses 7-11 Krishna points out 
what is knowledge and what is ignorance in the following language: 

“Pridelessness (Humility), Unpretentiousness, Non-injury or 
Harmlessness, Forgiveness, Straight-forwardness, (uprightness), 
Devotion to Preceptor, Purity, Steadiness, Self-restraint, Desirelessness 
towards objects of sense, absence of Egoism, Reflection on the suffering 
and evil of Birth, Death, decrepitude and disease, Non-attachment, 
Non-identification of oneself with regard to son, wife and home and 
the rest, Constant even-mindedness on approach of both (what is) 
agreeable and (what is) disagreeable unswerving devotion to Me with 
undivided meditation of Me, Resort to sequestered spots (contemplation, 
concentration, in solitude), Distaste for the society of worldly men, 
Incessant application to the knowledge relating to self, Perception or 
realisation of the true purport of the knowledge of the Tattvas (Samkhya 
Philosophy), all this is called ‘knowledge’; what is Ajnana (Ignorance) 
which is the reverse thereof.” 

Can anyone who knows anything of the Gospel of Buddha deny 
that the Bhagvat Gita has not in these stanzas reproduced word for 
word the main doctrines of Buddhism? 

In chapter XIII verses 5, 6, 18, 19, the Bhagvat Gita gives a new 
metaphorical interpretation of karmas under various heads (1) Yajnas 
(sacrifices); (2) Dana (Gifts); (3) Tapas (penances); (4) Food and 
(5) Svadhyaya (Vedic study). What is the source of this new 
interpretation of old ideas ? Compare with this what Buddha is 
reported to have said in the Majjhina Nikaya I, 286 Sutta XVI. 
Can anyone doubt that what Krishna says in verses 5, 6, 18, 19 of 
chapter XVII is a verbatim reproduction of the words of Buddha? 

1 See Mahapadana Sutta p. 

2 Tevijja Sutta p. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


371 


KRISHNA AND HIS GITA 371 

These are only a few illustrations I have selected those of major 
doctrinal importance. Those who are interested in pursuing the 
subject, may take up the reference to similarities between Gita 
and Buddhism given by Telang in the footnotes to his edition of 
the Bhagvat Gita and satisfy their curiosity. But the illustrations 
I have given will be enough to show how greatly the Bhagvat Gita 
is permeated by Buddhistic ideology and how much the Gita has 
borrowed from Buddhism. To sum up the Bhagvat Gita seems to be 
deliberately modelled on Buddhists Suttas. The Buddhists Suttas are 
dialogues. So is the Bhagvat Gita. Buddha’s religion offered salvation 
to women and Shudras. Krishna also comes forward to offer salvation 
to women and Shudras. Buddhists say, “I surrender to Buddha, to 
Dhamma and to Sangha.” So Krishna says, “Give up all religions 
and surrender unto Me.” No parallel can be closer than what exists 
between Buddhism and Bhagvat Gita. 

IV 

I have shown that Gita is later than Purva Mimansa and also 
later than Buddhism. I could well stop here. But I feel I cannot. For 
there still remains one argument against my thesis which requires 
to be answered. It is the argument of Mr. Tilak. It is an ingenious 
argument. Mr. Tilak realizes that there are many similarities in ideas 
and in words between the Bhagvat Gita and Buddhism. Buddhism 
being earlier than the Bhagvat Gita, the obvious conclusion is that 
the Bhagvat Gita is the debtor and Buddhism is the creditor. This 
obvious conclusion is not palatable to Mr. Tilak or for the matter of 
that to all upholders of counter-revolution. With them it is a question 
of honour that counter-revolution should not be shown to be indebted 
to Revolution. To get over this difficulty Mr. Tilak has struck a new 
line. He points out the distinction between Hinayana Buddhism 
and Mahayana Buddhism and say, that Mahayana Buddhism was 
later than Bhagvat Gita and if there are any similarities between 
the Buddhism and Bhagvat Gita it is due to the borrowing by the 
Mahayanist from the Bhagvat Gita. This raises two questions. What is 
the date of the origin of the Mahayana Buddhism ? What is the date 
of the composition of the Bhagvat Gita ? The argument of Mr. Tilak is 
ingenious and clever. But it has no substance. In the first place, it is 
not original. It is based on certain casual remarks made by Winternitz 1 
and by Kern 2 in foot-notes that there are certain similarties between 

1 History of Indian Literature (English Translation) Vol. II, p. 229 foot-note. 

2 Manual of Indian Buddhism p. 122 foot-note. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


372 


372 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the Bhagvat Gita and the Mahayan Buddhism and that there similarities 
are the result of Mahayana Buddhism borrowing its ideas from the 
Bhagvat Gita. Behind these remarks there is no evidence of special 
research either on the part of Winternitz, Kern or Mr. Tilak. All of them 
seem to be led away by the assumption that the Bhagvat Gita is earlier 
than Mahayana Buddhism. 

This leads me to examine the question of the date of the Bhagvat 
Gita particularly with reference to the theory as put forth by Mr. Tilak. 
Mr. Tilak 1 is of opinion that the Gita is part of the Mahabharata and 
that both have been written by one and the same author named Vyasa 
and consequently the date of the Mahabharata must be the date of the 
Bhagvat Gita. The Mahabharata, Mr. Tilak argues, must have been 
written at least 500 years before the Shaka Era on the groung that 
the stories contained in the Mahabharata were known to Megasthenes 
who was in India about 300 B.C. as a Greek ambassador to the court of 
Chandragupta Maurya. The Shaka Era began in 78 A.D. On this basis 
it follows that the Bhagvat Gita must have been composed before 422 
B.C. This is his view about the date of the composition of the present 
Gita. According to him, the original Gita must have been some centuries 
older than Mahabharata If reliance be placed on the tradition referred 
to in the Bhagvat Gita that the religion of the Bhagvat Gita was 
taught by Nara to Narayan in very ancient times. Mr. Tilak’s theory 
as to the date of the composition of the Mahabharata is untenable. 
In the first place, it assumes that the whole of the Bhagvat Gita and 
the whole of Mahabharat have been written at one stretch, at one 
time and by one hand. There is no warrant for such an assumption, 
either in tradition, or in the internal evidence of these two treatises. 
Confining the discussion to the Mahabharata the assumption made by 
Mr. Tilak is quite opposed to well-known Indian traditions. This tradition 
divides the compostion of the Mahabharata into three stages; (1) Jaya 
(2) Bharata and (3) Mahabharata and assigns to each part a different 
author. According to this tradition Vyasa was the author of the 1st 
edition so to say of the Mahabharata called ‘Jaya’. Of the Second Edition 
called ‘Bharata’ tradition assigns the authorship to Vaishampayana 
and that of the Third Edition called Mahabharata to ‘Sauti’. That this 
tradition is well-founded has been confirmed by the researches of Prof. 
Hopkins based on the examination of. internal evidence furnished by 
the Mahabharata. According to Prof. Hopkins 2 there have been several 
stages in the composition of the Mahabharata. As has been pointed 

1 Gita Rahasya Vol. II p. 791-800. 

2 The Great Epic of India p. 398. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


373 


KRISHNA AND HIS GITA 373 

out by Prof. Hopkins 1 in the first stage it was just a Pandu Epic consisting 
of plays and legends about heroes who took part in the Mahabharata 
war without the masses of didactic material. Such a Mahabharata, says 
Prof. Hopkins, may have come into existence between 400-200 B.C. The 
second stage was the remaking of the epic by the inclusion of didactic 
matter and the addition of Puranic material. This was between 200 B.C. 
and 200 A.D. The third stage is marked when (1) the last books were 
added to the composition as it stood at the end of the second stage with 
the introduction of the first book and (2) the swollen Anushasana Parva 
was separated from Shanti Parva and recognized as a separate book. This 
happened between 200 to 400 A.D. To these three stages Prof. Hopkins 
adds a fourth or a final stage of occasional amplification which started 
from 400 A.D. onwards. In coming to this conclusion Prof. Hopkins has 
anticipated and dealt with all the arguments advanced by Mr. Tilak such 
as the mention of Mahabharata in Panini 2 and in the Grihyasutras. 3 
The only new pieces of evidence produced by Mr. Tilak which has not 
been considered by Prof. Hopkins are two. One such piece of evidence 
consists of the statements which are reported to have been recorded by 
Megasthenes, 4 the Greek Ambassador to the court of Chandra Gupta 
Maurya, and the other is the astronomical evidence 5 , in the Adi Parva 
which refers to the Uttarayana starting with the Shravana constellation. 
The facts adduced by Mr. Tilak as coming from Megasthenes may not be 
denied and may go to prove that at the time of Megasthenes i.e., about 
300 B.C. a cult of Krishna worship had come into existence among the 
Sauraseni community. But how can this prove that the Mahabharata 
had then come into existence ? It cannot. Nor can it prove that the 
legends and stories mentioned by Megasthenes were taken by him from 
the Mahabharata. For there is nothing to militate against the view 
that these legends and stories were a floating mass of Saga and that it 
served as a reservoir both to the writer of the Mahabharata as well as 
to Greek Ambassador. 

Mr. Tilak’s astronomical evidence may be quite sound. He is 
right insaying 6 that “it is stated in the Anugita that Visvamitra 
started the enumeration of the constellation with Shravana (Ma.Bha. 
Asva.44.2, and Adi. 71. 34). That has been interpreted by commentators 
as showing that the Uttarayana then started with the Shravana 
constellation, and no other interpretation is proper. At the date of the 

1 The Great Epic of India p. 398. 

2 The Great Epic of India p. 395. 

3 Ibid p. 390. 

4 Gita Rahasya II p. 79. 

5 Gita Rahasya II p. 789. 

6 Ibid p. 789. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


374 


374 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Vedanga-Jyotisa, the Uttarayana used to start with the Sun in the 
Dhanistha constellation. According to astronomical calculations, the 
date when the Uttarayana should start with the Sun in the Dhanistha 
constellation to about 1,500 years before the Saka era; and according 
to astronomical calculations, it takes about a thousand years for the 
Uttarayana to start one constellation earlier. According to this calculation, 
the date when the Uttarayana ought to start with the Sun in the Shravana 
constellation comes to about 500 years before the Saka era. This conculsion 
would have been proper if it was true that the Mahabharata was one 
whole piece, written at one time by one author. It has, however, been 
shown that there is no warrant for such an assumption. In view of this 
Mr, Tilak’s astroncomical evidence cannot be used to determine the date of 
the Mahabharata. It can be used only to determine the date of that part 
of the Mahabharata which is affected by it — in this case the Adi Parva 
of the Mahabharata. For these reasons Mr. Tilak’s theory as to the date 
of the composition of the Mahabharata must fall to the ground. Indeed 
any attempt to fix a single date for a work like the Mahabharata which 
is a serial story produced in parts at long intervals must be regarded 
as futile. All that one can say is that the Mahabharata was composed 
between 400B.C. to 400A.D. a conclusion too broad to be used for the 
purpose which Mr. Tilak has in view. Even this span seems to some 
scholars to be too narrow. It is contended 1 that the reference to Edukas 
in the 190th Adhyaya of the Vanaparva has been wrongly interpreted 
to mean. Buddhist Stupas when, as a matter of fact, it refers to the 
Idgahas created by the Muslim invaders for Muslim converts. If this 
interpretation is correct it would show that parts of the Mahabharata 
were written about or after the invasions of Mohammed Ghori. 

Let me now turn to examine Mr. Tilak’s theory as to the date of 
the composition of the Bhagvat Gita, There are really two propositions 
underlying his theory. First is that the Gita is part of the Mahabharata, 
both are written at one time and are the handiwork of one man. His 
second proposition is that the Bhagvat Gita has been the same what it 
is today from the very beginning when it first came to be written. To 
avoid confusion I propose to take them separately. 

Mr. Tilak’s object in linking the Gita with the Mahabharata in the 
matter of its composition is quite obvious. It is to have the date of the 
Mahabharata which he thinks is known to derermine the date of the 
Bhagvat Gita which is unknown. The basis on which Mr. Tilak has 
tried to establish an integral connection between the Mahabharata and 
the Bhagvat Gita is unfortunately the weakest part of his theory. To 

1 Dharmanand Kausambi — Hindi Sanskriti ani Ahimsa (Marathi) p. 156. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


375 


KRISHNA AND HIS GITA 375 

accept that the Gita is a part of the Mahabharata because the author 
of both is Vyasa — and this is the argument of Mr. Tilak — is to accept a 
fiction for a fact. It assumes that Vyasa is the name of some particular 
individual capable of being identified. This is evident from the fact that 
we have Vyasa as the author of the Mahabharata, Vyasa as the author 
of the Puranas, Vyasa as the author of Bhagvat Gita and Vyasa as the 
author of the Bramha Sutras. It cannot therefore be accepted as true that 
the same Vyasa is the author of all these works separated as they are 
by a long span of time extending to several centuries. It is well-known 
how orthodox writers wishing to hide their identity get better authority 
for their works by the use of a revered name were in the habit of using 
Vyasa as a nom-de-plume or pen name. If the author of the Gita is a 
Vyasa he must be a different Vyasa. There is another argument which 
seems to militate against Mr, Tilak’s theory of synchroniety between the 
composition of the Bhagvat Gita and the Mahabharata. The Mahabharata 
consists of 18 Parvas. There are also 18 Puranas. It is curious to find that 
Bhagvat Gita has also 18 Adhyayas. The question is: Why should there be 
this parallelism? The answer is that the ancient Indian writers regarded 
certain names and certain numbers as invested with great sanctity. The 
name Vyasa and the number 18 are illustrations of this fact. But there 
is more in the fixation of 18 as the chapters of the Bhagvat Gita than 
is apparent on the face of it. Who set 18 as the sacred number, the 
Mahabharata or the Gita ? If the Mahabharata, then Gita must have 
been written after the Mahabharata. If it is the Bhagvat Gita, then the 
Mahabharata must have been written after the Gita. In any case, the 
two could not have been written at one and the same time. 

These considerations may not be accepted as decisive against 
Mr. Tilak’s first proposition. But there is one which I think is decisive. 
I refer to the relative position of Krishna in the Mahabharata and in 
the Bhagvat Gita. In the Mahabharata, Krishna is nowhere represented 
as a God accepted by all. The Mahabharata itself shows the people 
were not prepared even to give him the first place. When at the time 
of the Rajasuya Yajna, Dharma offered to give Krishna priority in 
the matter of honouring the guest, Shishupala — the near relation of 
Krishna — protested and abused Krishna. He not only charged him 
with low origin, but also with loose morals, an intriguer who violated 
rules of war for the sake of victory. So abhorent but so true was this 
record of Krishna’s foul deeds that when Duryodhan flung them in 
the face of Krishna, the Mahabharata itself in the Gada Parva records 
that the Gods in heaven came out to listen to the charges made by 
Duryodhan against Krishna and after listening showered flowers as 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


376 


376 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

a token of their view that the charges contained the whole truth and 
nothing but the truth. On the other hand, the Bhagvat Gita presented 
Krishna as God omnipotent, omniscient, omnipresent, pure, loving, 
essence of goodness. Two such works containing two quite contradictory 
estimates about one and the same personality could not have been written 
at one and the same time by one and the same author. It is a pity that 
Mr. Tilak in his anxiety to give a pre- Buddhist date to the composition 
of the Bhagvat Gita should have completely failed to take note of these 
important considerations. 

The second proposition of Mr. Tilak is equally unsound. The attempt 
to fix a date for the composition of the Bhagvat Gita is nothing but the 
pursuit of a mirage. It is doomed to failure. The reason is that the Bhagvat 
Gita is not a single book written by a single author. It consists of different 
parts written at different times by different authors. 

Prof. Garbe is the only scholar who has seen the necessity of following 
this line of inquiry. Prof. Garbe hold that there are two parts of the Bhagvat 
Gita one original and one added. I am not satisfied with this statement. 
My reading of the Bhagvat Gita leads me to the conclusion that there 
have been four separate parts of Bhagvat Gita. They are so distinct that 
taking even the present treatise as it stands they can be easily marked off. 

(i) The original Gita was nothing more than a heroic tale told or a 
ballad recited by the bards of how Arjuna was not prepared to fight and 
how Krishna forced him to engage in battle, how Arjuna yielded and so 
on. It may have been a romantic story but there was nothing religious or 
philosophical in it. 

This original Gita will be found embedded in Chapter I, Chapter II, 
verses.... and Chapter XI verses 32-33 in which Krishna is reported to 
have ended the argument: 

“Be my tool, carry out my will, don’t worry about sin and evil resulting 

from fighting, do as I tell you, don’t be impudent.” 

This is the argument which Krishna used to compel Arjuna to fight. 
And this argument of coercion and compulsion made Arjuna yield. 
Krishna probably threatened Arjuna with brute force if he did not actually 
use it. The assumption of Vishva-rupa by Krishna is only different way 
of describing the use of brute force. On that theory it is possible that the 
chapter in the present Bhagvat Gita dealing with Vishva-rupa is also a 
part of the original Bhagvat Gita. 

(ii) The first patch on the original Bhagvat Gita is the part in which 
Krishna is spoken of as Ishvara, the God of the Bhagvat religion. This 
part of the Gita is embedded in those verses of the present Bhagvat Gita 
which are devoted to Bhakti Yoga. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


377 


KRISHNA AND HIS GITA 377 

(iii) The second patch on the original Bhagvat Gita is the part which 
introduces the Sankhya and the Vedanta philosophy as a defence to the 
doctrines of Purva Mimansa which they did not have before. The Gita 
was originally only a historical Saga with the cult of Krishna came to 
be interwoven. The Philosophy portion of the Bhagvat Gita was a later 
intrusion can be proved quite easily from the nature of the original dialogue 
and the sequence of it. 

In chapter I verses 20-47 Arjuna mentions those difficulties. In chapter 
II Krishna attempts to meet the difficulties mentioned by Arjuna. There 
are arguments and counter arguments. Krishna’s first argument is 
contained in verse 2 and 3 in which Krishna tells Arjuna that his conduct 
is infamous, unbecoming an Arya and that he should not play the part of 
an effeminate which was unworthy of him. To this, Arjuna gives a reply 
which is embodied in verses 4 to 8. In verses 4 to 5 he says, “how can I 
kill Bhishma and Drona who are entitled to highest reverence: it would 
be better to live by begging than kill them. I do not wish to live to enjoy 
a kindom won by killing old revered elders.” In verses 6 to 8 Arjuna 
says: “I do not know which of the two is more meritorious, whether we 
should vanquish the Kauravas or whether we should be vanquished by 
them.” Krishna’s reply to this is contained in verses 11 to 39 in which 
he propounds (i) that grief is unjustified because things are imperishable, 
(ii) that it is a false view that a man is killed when the atman is eternal 
and (iii) that he must fight because it is the duty of the Kshatriya to fight. 

Any one who reads the dialogue will notice the following points: 

(1) The questions put by Arjuna are not philosophical questions. 
They are natural questions put by a worldly man faced with worldly 
problems. 

(2) Upto a point Krishna treats them as natural questions and 
returns to them quite natural replies. 

(3) The dialogue takes a new turn. Arjuna after having informed 
Krishna positively and definitely that he will not fight, suddenly 
takes a new turn and expresses a doubt whether it is a good to kill 
the Kauravas or be killed by them. This is a deliberate departure 
designed to give Krishna a philosophical defence of war, uncalled 
for by anything said by Arjuna. 

(4) Again there is a drop in the tone of Krishna from verses 31 to 
38. He treats the question as natural and tells him to fight because 
it is the duty of the Kshatriya to fight. 

Anyone can see from this that the introduction of the Vedanta 
philosophy is quite unnatural and therefore a later intrusion. With 
regard to the introduction of the Sankhya philosophy the case is quite 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


378 


378 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

obvious. Often it is expounded without any question by Arjuna and whenever 
it has been propounded in answer to a question that question has nothing 
to do with the war. This shows that the philosophic parts of the Bhagvat 
Gita are not parts of the original Gita but have been added later on and 
in order to find a place for them, new, appropriate and leading questions 
have been put in the mouth of Arjuna which have nothing to do with the 
mundane problems of war. 

(iv) The third patch on the oriinal Bhagvat Gita consists of verses in which 
Krishna is elevated from the position of Ishwara to that of Parmeshwara. This 
patch can be easily detected as being chapters X and XV where Krishna says: 

(Quotation not mentioned) 

As I said, to go in for a precise date for the composition of the Bhagvat 
Gita is to go on a fool’s errand and that if an attempt in that direction is 
to be of any value, effort must be directed to determine the date of each 
patch separately. Proceeding in this way it is possible that what I have 
called the original unphilosophic Bhagvat Gita was part of the first edition 
of the Mahabharata called Jaya. The first patch on the original Bhagvat 
Gita in which Krishna is depicted as Ishvara must be placed in point of date 
sometimes later than Megasthenes when Krishna was only a tribal God, 1 How 
much later it is not possible to say. But it must be considerably later. For 
it must be remembered that the Brahmins were not friendly to Krishnaism 
in the beginning. In fact they were opposed to it. 2 It must have taken some 
time before the Brahmins could have become reconciled to Krishna worship. 3 

The second patch on the original Bhagvat Gita having reference to Sankhya 
and Vedanta must for reason already given be placed later than the Sutras 
of Jaimini and Badarayana. The question of the date of these Sutras has 
carefully been examined by Prof. Jacobi 4 . His conclusion is that these Sutras 
were composed sometime between 200 and 450 A.D. 

The third patch on the original Bhagvat Gita in which Krishna is 
raised into Parmeshvara must be placed during the reign of the Gupta 
Kings. The reason is obvious. Gupta kings made Krishna-Vasudev 
their family deity as their opponents the Shaka kings had made 

1 Dr. Bhandarkar in his ‘Saivism and Vaishnavism’ says, “If the Vasudeva Krishna 
worship prevailed in the time of the first Maurya it must have originated long before the 
establishment of the Maurya dynasty.” This is an unexceptionable statement. But it seems 
to me that a distinction must be made between Krishna as a tribal God and Krishna as 
an universalized Ishwara. The date for the first may be what Dr. Bhandarkar suggests but 
the same cannot be the date for the second. In the Gita we are concerned with the second. 

2 See Shamshastri Memorial Volume. 

3 The opposition to Krishnaism has been expressed by so late a person as Shankaracharya. 

4 The dates of the Philosophical Sutras or the Brahmans — in the journal of the American 
Oriental Society — Vol. XXXI 1911. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


379 


KRISHNA AND HIS GITA 379 

Mahadeo their family deity. The Brahmins to whom religion has been a 
trade, who were never devoted to one God but came forward to worship 
the deity of the ruling race thought of pleasing their masters by making 
their family deity into a high and mighty Parmeshvar. If this is correct 
explanation then this patch on the original Bhagvat Gita must be placed 
between 400 and 464 A.D. 

All this goes to confirm the view that the attempt to place the Bhagvat 
Gita prior in point of time to Buddhism cannot succeed. It is the result 
of wishful thinking on the part of those who have inherited a positive 
dislike to Buddha and his revolutionary gospel. History does not support 
it. History proves quite abnormally that at any rate those portions of the 
Bhagvat Gita which have any doctrinal value are considerably later in point 
of time to the Buddhist canon and the Sutras of Jaimini and Badarayana. 

The discussion of the dates not only proves that the Bhagvat Gita is 
later than Hinayana Buddhism but is also later than Mahayana Buddhism. 
The impression prevails that Mahayana Buddhism is later in origin. It is 
supposed to have come into being after A.D. 100 when Kanishka held the 
third Buddhist Council to settle the dissension in the Buddhist Church. 
This is absolutely a mistake. 1 It is not true that after the Council a new 
creed of Buddhism came into existence. What happened is that new 
names of abuse came into existence for parties which were very old. As 
Mr. Kimura has shown the Mahayanist is simply another name for the 
sect of Buddhists known as Mahasanghikas. The sect of Mahasanghikas 
had come into being very much earlier than is supposed to be the case. If 
tradition be believed the sect had come into being at the time of the First 
Buddhist Council held at Pataliputra 236 years after the death of Buddha 
i.e., 307 B.C 2 for settling the Buddhist canon and is said to have led the 
opposition to the Theravad sect of Buddhism which later on came to be 
stigmatized as Hinayana (which means those holding to the low path). 
There could hardly be any trace of Bhagvat Gita when the Mahasanghikas 
later known as Mahayanists came into being. 

Apart from this what have the Mahayanists borrowed from the 
Bhagvat Gita? Indeed what can they borrow from the Bhagvat Gita? 
As Mr. Kimura points out the doctrine of every school of Buddhism is 
mainly concerned at least with three doctrines: (1) Those which deal 
with cosmic existence; (2) Those which deal with Buddhology; and 
(3) Those which deal with conception of human life. Mahayana is no 

1 On the whole subject see — A Historical study of the terms Hinayana and Mahayana and 
the origin of Mahayana Buddhism — by Ryukan Kimura, Cal. University 1927. 

2 This is if the date of Buddha’s death is taken to he 543 B.C. and would be 217 B.C. if 
the date of his death is taken to be 453 B.C. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


380 


380 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

exception to this. Except probably on Buddhology the Mahayanists could 
hardly use the Bhagvat Gita to draw upon So different is the aproach 
of the two on the other doctrines and even this possibility is excluded 
by the factor of time. 

The foregoing discussion completely destroys the only argument that 
could be urged against my thesis — namely that the Bhagvat Gita is very 
ancient, pre -Buddhistic in origin and therefore could not be related to 
Jaimini’s Purva Mimansa and treated as an attempt to give a philosophic 
defence of his counter-revolutionary doctrines. 

To sum up, my thesis is three-fold. In other words it has three parts. 
First is that the Bhagvat Gita is fundamentally a counter-revolutionary 
treatise of the same class as Jamini’s Purva Mimansa — the official Bible 
of counter-revolution. Some writers relying on verses 40-46 of Chapter 
II hold the view that the Bhagvat Gita is 

(In all the copies available with us, the essay has been left here 
incomplete, as is seen from the above sentence — Editors.) 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


381 


CHAPTER 14 

Analytical Notes of 

Virat Parva & Udyog Parva 

VI RAT PARVA 

1. The spies sent by Kauravas to search for the existence of the 
Pandavas return to Duryodhan and tell him that they are unable to 
discover them. They ask his permission as to what to do. — Virat Parva, 
Adhya. 25. 

2. Duryodhan asks for advice from his advisers. Kama said send other 
spies. Dushasan said they might have gone beyond the sea. But search 
for them. — Ibid. — Adhya. 26. 

3. Drona said the Pandavas are not likely to be defeated or destroyed. 
They may be living as Tapasis, therefore send Siddhas and Brahamins 
as spies — Ibid. Adhya 27. 

4. Bhishma supports Drona — Ibid Adhya. 28. 

5. Kripacharya supported Bhishma and added — Pandavas are great 
enemies. But wise man does not neglect even small enemies. While they 
are in Agnyatavasa you should go on collecting armies from now. — Ibid 
Adhya. 29. 

6. Then Susharma King of Trigarth raised quite a different subject. 
He said that Kichaka who was the Senapati of King Virat I hear dead, 
King Virat is to give us great trouble. Kichaka having been dead Virat 
must have become very weak. Why not invade the Kingdom of Virat 
? This is the most opportune time. Kama also supported Susharma. 
Why worry about the Pandavas, these Pandavas are without wealth, 
without army and fallen. Why bother with them? They might have even 
been dead by now. Give up the search and let undertake the project of 
Susharma — Ibid Adhya. 30. 

7. Susharma’s invasion of Vairat. Susharma carries away the cows of 
Virat. The cow herds go and inform Virat of this and ask him to pursue 
Susharma and rescue the cows. — Ibid Adhya. 31. 

8. Virat became ready for war. In the meanwhile Shatanik the 
younger brother of Virat suggested that instead of going alone he 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


382 


382 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

might take with him Rank (Sahadeo) Ballava (Yudhishtira) Santipal 
(Bhima) and Granthik (Nakula) to help him to fight Susharma. Virat 
agreed and they all went — Ibid. Adhya. 31. 

9. War between Shusharma and Virat — Ibid Adhya. 32. 

10. Yudhishthira rescues Virat. — Ibid. Adhya. 33. 

11. Announcement in the Virat Nagari that their King is safe. — Ibid 
Adhya. 34. 

ENTRY IN VIRAT NAGARI BY KAURVAS 

12. While King Virat went after Susharman Duryodhan with Bhishma, 
Drona, Kama, Krapa, Ashvashthama, Shakuni, Dushashana, Vivinshali, 
Vikama, Chitrasen, Durmukha, Dushala and other warriers entered the 
Virat Nagari and captured the cows of Virat and were going away. The 
cowherds came to the palace of King Virat and gave the news. They 
need not find the King but they found his son Uttar, so they gave him 
the news. — Ibid Adhya. 35. 

13. Uttar began to boast saying he was superior to Arjuna and would 
do the job. But his complaint was that there was no one to act his 
Sarathi. Draupadi went and told him that Brahannada was at one time 
the Sarathi of Arjuna. Why not ask him? He said he had no courage and 
requested Draupadi to make the request. Why not ask your younger sister 
Manorama. So he told Manorama to bring Brahannada — Ibid Adhya. 36. 

14. Manorama takes Brahannada to his brothers and Uttara persuades 
him to be his Sarathi. Brahannada agreed and took the Rath of Uttara 
in front of the Kauravas — Ibid. Adhya. 37. 

15. On seeing the army of the Kauravas Uttara left the Rath and 
started running away. Arjuna stopped him. The Kauravas seeing this 
began to suspect that the man might be Arjuna. Arjuna told him not 
to be afraid — Ibid Adhya. 38. 

16. Arjuna took his Ratha to the Shami tree. Seeing this Drona said 
he must be Arjuna. Hearing this the Kauravas were greatly upset. But 
Duryodhana said if Drona is right it is good for us. Because it is before 
the thirteenth year that the Pandavas will have been discovered and 
they will have to suffer Vanavas again for 12 years. — Ibid Adhya. 39. 

17. Arjuna asks Uttara to climb the Shami tree and to take down the 
weapons. — Ibid Adhya. 40. 

18. Uttara’s doubts about the corpse on the Shami Tree — Ibid Adhya. 41. 

19. Uttara’s excitement after seeing the weapons — Ibid Adhya. 42. 

20. Arjuna’s description of the weapons. — Ibid Adhya. 43. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


383 


ANALYTICAL NOTES OF VIRAT PARVA & UDYOG PARVA 383 

21. Uttara’s Inquiry regarding the whereabouts about the Pandavas. — Ibid 
Adhya. 44. 

22. Climbing down of Uttara from the tree — Ibid Adhya. 45. 

23. The Rath with Vanar Symbol. Drona becomes sure that he is Arjuna. 
Bad omens seen by the army of the Kauravas. — Ibid Adhya. 46. 

24. Duryodhan encourages the soldiers who were frightened by Drona’s 
saying that it was Arjuna. Kama’s slander of Drona and proposal to Duryodhan 
to remove Drona as a Commander-in-Chief. — Ibid Adhya. 47. 

25. Boasting by Kama and Pratijna to defeat Arjuna — Ibid Adhya. 48. 

26. Krapacharya’s admonition to Kama not to brag and boast. War is 
regarded as bad by the Shastras — Ibid Adhya. 49. 

27. Ashvasthama abuses Kama and Duryodhan because of their slander 
of Drona — Ibid Adhya. 50. 

28. Ashavashthama abused Kama and Duryodhan for speaking ill of 
Drona. Kama replied, ‘after all I am only a Suta.’ But Arjuna has behaved 
as bad as Rama behaved towards Vali — Ibid Adhya. 50. 

29. Ashvashthama was quieted by Bhisma, Drona and Krapa, Duryodhan 
and Kama tendered apology to Drona — Ibid Adhya. 51. 

30. Bhishma’s decision that the Pandavas have completed 13 years. — ibid 
Adhya. 52. 

31. Arjuna has defeated the army of the Kauravas. — Ibid Adhya. 53. 

32. Arjuna defeats Kama’s Bhrata. Arjuna defeats Kama and Kama runs 
away — Ibid Adhya. 54. 

33. Arjuna destroys the army of the Kauravas and breaks the Rath of 
Kripacharya — Ibid Adhya. 55. 

34. Gods came out in heaven to witness the fight between Arjuna and the 
army of the Kauravas — Ibid Adhya. 56. 

35. Battle between Krapa and Arjuna and the running away of Krapa. — 
Ibid Adhya. 57. 

36. Battle between Drona and Arjuna and running away of Drona. — Ibid 
Adhya.’ 58. 

37. Battle between Ashavashthama and Arjuna — Ibid Adhya. 59. 

38. Battle between Kama and Arjuna, defeat of Kama — Adhya. 60. 

39. Attack on Bhishma by Arjuna — Ibid Adhya. 61. 

40. Arjuna kills the Kauravas soldiers — Ibid Adhya. 62. 

41. Defeat of Bhishma and his running away from the Battle-field — Ibid 
Adhya. 64. 

42. Fainting of the soldiers of the Kauravas. Bhishmas telling them to 
return home. — Ibid Adhya. 66. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


384 


384 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

43. Kaurava soldiers surrendering to Arjuna from Abhay. Uttar and 
Arjuna return to Virat Nagari — Ibid Adhya. 67. 

44. Virat enters his capital and his people honouring him. — Ibid 
Adhya. 68. 

45. The Pandavas enter the King’s Assembly. — Ibid Adhya. 69. 

46. Arjuna introduces his other brothers in Virat. — Ibid Adhya. 71. 

47. Marriage between Arjuna’s son and the daughter of Virat. — Ibid 
Adhya. 72. 

48. Thereafter the Pandavas leave Virat Nagari and live in Upaplowya 
Nagari — Ibid Adhya. 72. 

49. Arjuna thereafter brought his son Abhimanyu, Vasudev, and Yadav 
from Anrut Desh — Ibid Adhya. 72. 

50. Friends of Yudhisthir such as Kings Kashiraj and Shalya came 
with two Akshauhini army. Similarly Yagyasen Drupadraj came with 
one Akshauhini. Draupadi’s all sons Ajinkya, Shikhandi, Drustadumna 
also came . — Ibid 72. 

UDYOGAPARVA 

After the marriage of Abhimanyu the Yadavas and the Pandavas met 
in the Sabha of King Virat. Krishna addresses them as to what is to 
be done about the future. We must do what is good both Kauravas and 
Pandavas. Dharma will accept anything — even one villaga — by Dharma. 
Even if he is given the whole kingdom by Duryodhana he will not accept 
it. Upto now the Pandavas have observed Niti. But if the Kauravas 
observe Aniti the Pandavas will not hesitate to kill the Kauravas. Let 
nobody be afraid on account of the fact that the Pandavas are a minority. 
They have many friends who will come to their rescue. We must try 
to know the wishes of the Kauravas. I suggest that we should send a 
messanger to Duryodhan and ask him to give part of the Kingdom to 
the Pandavas. — Udyog Parva, Adhya. 1. 

2. Balaram supports the proposal of Krishna but added that it was the 
fault of Dharma knowing that he was losing at the hands of Shakuni. 
Therefore instead of fighting with the Kauravas get what you can by 
negotiation. — Ibid, Adhya. 2. 

3. Satyaki got up and condemned Balaram for his attitude — Ibid 
Adhya. 3. 

4. Drupad supports Satyaki. Drupad agrees to send his Purohit as a 
messanger — Ibid. Adhya. 4. 

5. Krishna supports Drupad and goes to Dwarka. Kings invited by 
Drupad and Virat arrive. Similarly Kings invited by Duryodhan arrive. — 
Ibid, Adhya. 5. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


385 


ANALYTICAL NOTES OF VIRAT PARVA & UDYOG PARVA 385 


6. Drupada instructs his purohit how to speak in the assembly and deal 
with the issue . — Ibid Adhya. 6. 

7. Arjuna and Duryodhana both go to Dwarka to ask for his aid in the 
war. He said I will help you both. I can give my army to one and I can 
join one singly. Choose what you want. Duryodhan chose the army. Arjuna 
choose Krishna . — Ibid Adhya. 7. 

8. Coming of Shalya to the Pandavas with a large army. Duryodhan thinks 
him lower. Meeting of Shalya and Pandavas. Pandavas request Shalya to 
discourage Kama in the war. Agreement of Shalya. — Ibid. Adhya. 8. 


9. Adhya. 9 — Irrelevant. 

10. Adhya. 10 — Irrelevant. 

11. Adhya. 11 — Irrelevant. 

12. Adhya. 12 — Irrelevant. 

13. Adhya. 13 — Irrelevant. 

14. Adhya. 14 — Irrelevant. 

15. Adhya. 15 — Irrelevant. 

16. Adhya. 16 — Irrelevant. 

17. Adhya. 17 — Irrelevant. 

18. Adhya. 18 — Irrelevant. 

19. Adhya — Satyaki comes to Pandvas with his army and Bhagadatta 
went to Duryodhana. 

20. Adhya. 20 — The Purohit of Drupada enters the Kauravas Sabha. The 
Purohit said that the Pandvas are prepared to part evil deeds of the Kauravas 
and make a compromise with them. He told them that the Pandavas have 
a large army yet they wish to compromise. 

21. Adhya. 21 — Bhishma supports the Purohit. Kama objects. Dispute 
between Bhishma and Kama. Dhratrarashtra suggests that Sanjaya be sent 
for negotiation on their behalf. 


22. Adhya. 22 — Dhratrarashtra sends Sanjaya to go to the Pandvas and 
give his blessings and say what you think best for the occasion and which 
will not advance enmity between the two. 


23. Adhya. 23 — Sanjaya’s going to the Pandvas. 

24. Adhya. 24 — Conversation betwen Sanjaya and Yudhistira. 


25. Adhya. 25 — Sanjaya condemns war. 

26. Adhya. 26 — Dharma says ‘I am prepared to compromise if the Kauravas 
give us our Kingdom of Indraprastha. 

27. Adhya. 27 — It is Adharma to kill Gurujan and obtain a Kingdom. If 
the Kauravas refuse to give you any kingdom without war you had better 
live by begging in the Kingdom of Vrishni and Andhakas. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


386 


386 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

28. Adhya. 28 — Says, Dharma Blame us Sanjaya if you think we have acted 
or acting against Dharma. Sanjaya says I want Swadharma or Sama. 

29. Adhya. 29 — Krishna’s address to Sanjaya why war is legitimate and asks 
him to go and tell his views to Dhratarashtra. 

30. Adhya. 30 — Sanjaya returns to Kauravas and tells Duryodhana to war. 
Duryodhan either to return Indraprastha to the Pandavas or be ready for war. 

31. Adhya. 30 — Sanjaya tells Duryodhan to live and let live. If he cannot give 
Indraprastha let him give us five villages. 

32. Adhya. 31 — Sanjaya reaches Dratrarashtra at night and tells him I will 
give you the message of Dharma in the morning. 

33. Adhya. 32 — Dhratarashtra is uneasy and wants to know the message 
Sanjaya brought. So he sends for Sanjaya immediately. Sanjaya gives him the 
message and says settle the dispute by giving them their share of the Kingdom. 

34. Adhya. 34 — Dhratarashtra calls for Vidura and asks his advice. His advice 
is, give the Pandavas their portion of the Kingdom. 

35. Adhya. 35 — Irrelevant. 

36. Adhya. 36 — Irrelevant. Vidur says make the two sides friends. 

37. Adhya. 37 — Irrelevant. 

38. Adhya 38 — Irrelevant. 

39. Adhya. 39 — Dhratarashtra tells Vidura I cannot give up Duryodhan 
although he is bad. 

40. Adhya. 40 — Vidura describes Chaturvarna. 

41. Adhya. 41 — Dhratarashtra asks Vidur about Brahma. He says I can’t 
because I am a Shudra. Then comes Sanat-Sujata. 

42. Adhya. 42 — Conversation between Dhratarashtra & Sanat Sujata on 
Brahma Vidya. 

43. Adhya. 43 — Dialogue between Sanat Sujat and Dhratarashtra on the 
same subject. 

44. Adhya. 44 — Sanat Sujata on Brahma Vidya. 

45. Adhya. 45 — Sanat Sujata preaches yoga. 

46. Adhya. 46 — Sanat Sujat on Atma. 

47. Adhya. 47 — Kauravas come to the Sabha to hear the message brought 
by Sanjaya. 

48. Adhya. 48 — Sanjaya delivers the message. (Particularly that part which 
was given by Arjuna?) 

49. Adhya. 49 — Praise of Arjuna & Krishna by Bhishma. Kama gets angry. 
Drona supports Bhisma and advices compromise. 

50. Adhya. 50 — Dhratarashtra asks Sanjaya who are the allies of the Pandvas 
& their strength. Sanjaya taunts, gets up answers. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


387 


ANALYTICAL NOTES OF VIRAT PARVA & UDYOG PARVA 387 

51. Adhya. 51 — Dhratarashtra thinks of the prowess of Bhismna and sighs. 

52. Adhya. 52 — Dhratarashtra thinks of the prowess of Arjuna and sighs. 

53. Adhya. 53 — Dhratarashtra thinks of the prowess of Dharma and his 
friends. He tells his sons to compromise with the Pandavas. 

54. Adhya. 54 — Sanjaya predicts the defeat of the Kauravas. 

55. Adhya. 55 — Duryodhan says Pandavas cannot defeat us because our 
forces are greater. 

56. Adhya. 56 — Sanjaya describes the disposition of the army made by 
the Pandavas. 

57. Adhya. 57 — Sanjaya describes how Pandavas have designed to kill the 
warriors of the Kauravas. Duryodhan says he is not afraid of the Pandvas 
defeating the Kauravas who have a larger army. 

58. Adhya. 58 — Dhratarashtra tells Duryodhan not to fight. Duryodhan 
takes oath not to swerve from battle. Dhratarashtra weeps. 

59. Adhya. 59 — Dhratarashtra tells Sanjaya to tell him what conversation 
took place between Krishna & Arjuna. 

60. Adhya. 60 — Dhratarashtra tells Duryodhan that the Devas will help 
the Pandavas and will ruin the Kauravas. 

61. Adhya. 61 — Duryodhan says he is not afraid of that. 

62. Adhya. 62 — Kama says he alone is capable of killing Arjuna. 

63. Adhya. 63 — Duryodhan says he is fighting relying on Kama & not on 
Bhishma, Drona etc. 

64. Adhya. 64 — Vidura tells Duryodhan give up enmity. 

65. Adhya. 65 — Dratarashtra admonishes Duryodhan. 

66. Adhya. 66 — Sanjaya tells Dratarashtra the message of Arjuna. 

67. Adhya. 67 — The kings who had assembled in the hall of the Kauravas 
return to their homes. Vyas and Gandhari come with Vidur. Vyas told 
Sanjaya to tell Dhratarashtra every thing he knows about the real Swarup 
of Krishna & Arjuna. 

68. Adhya. 68 — Sanjaya tells Dhratarashtra about Krishna. 

69. Adhya. 69 — Dhratarashtra tells Duryodhan to surrender to Krishna. 
Refusal of Duryodhan. Gandhari abuses Duryodhan. 

70. Adhya 70 — Different names of Krishna & their origin. 

71. Adhya 71 — Dhratarashtra surrenders to Krishna. 

72. Adhya. 72 — Conversation between Yudhistira and Krishna. Yudhistir 
says Sanjaya told him not to rely on Dhratarashtra. Yudhistir stresses the 
importance of property Speaks of (Kshatradharma) & the necessity of observing 
it Krishna proposes to go to the Kauravas. Yudhistir does not like the idea 
but says to what you think is the best. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


388 


388 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

73. Adhya. 73 — Krishna tells Dharma the secret which has in mind. Don’t 
use soft speech with the Pandvas tells Krishna to Dharma. There are plenty 
of reasons why you should not make any compromise with the Kauravas. 
Emphasizes how the Kauravas disgraced Draupadi. Therefore Oh; Dharma 
do not hesitate to kill them. 

74. Adhya. 74 — Bhishma tells Krishna to use soft speech with the Kauravas. 

75. Adhya. 75 — Krishna redicules Bhima. 

76. Adhya. 76 — Bhima makes up his mind to fight. 

77. Adhya. 77 — Krishna tells Bhima the difference between Daiva and 
Paurush. 

78. Adhya. 78 — Arjuna tells Krishna to adopt Shama — failing war can be 
considered. 

79. Adhya. 79 — Krishna’s talk to Arjun. I will try to bring about a settlement 
by peace. If that is not possible be ready for war. I will not communicate to 
Duryodhan Dharma’s willingness to accept, five villages. 

80. Adhya. 80 — Nakul tells Krishna to do the best. 

81. Adhya. 81 — Saha dev meets Krishna and tells him to bring about a 
war with the Kauravas. Satyaki said that all warriors assembled here agree 
with the view of Sahadeo. 

82. Adhya. 82 — Draupadi meets Krishna & tells him that she will not be 
satisfied unless Duryodhan is punished. Krishna gives her assurance. 

83. Adhya. 83 — Last meeting between Arjuna and Krishna. Arjuna makes 
the best effort for Shama. Yudhishtir tells Krishna to give assurances to 
Kunti. Krishna starts on his mission. 

84. Adhya. 84 — Good & Bad omens to Krishna on his way to Hastinapura. 

85. Adhya. 85 — Duryodhana creates Resting places for Krishna’s journey 
to Hastinapur. Krishna arrives in Hastinapura. 

86. Adhya. 86 — Dhratarashtra tells Vidura what gifts are to be offered 
to krishna. 

87. Adhya. 87 — Vidur tells Dhratarashtra that he cannot separate Krishna 
from the Pandavas. 

88. Adhya. 88 — Duryodhan says Krishna is worship. But this is not the 
time to worship him. Bhishma tells Duryodhan to make a compromise with 
Pandavas. Duryodhan desires to look up Krishna. Bhishma’s strong opposition 
to Duryodhana. 

89. Adhya. 89 — Krishna’s entry into Hastinapur. Meeting with Dhratarashtra. 
His stay with Vidura. 

90. Adhya. 90 — Meeting between Kunti and Krishna — Kunti’s 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


389 


ANALYTICAL NOTES OF VIRAT PARVA & UDYOG PARVA 389 

sorrow. Krishna consoles her. Kunti tells Krishna — (1) Tell ray sons to 
fight for their kingdom. (2) I am sorry for Draupadi. 

91. Adhya. 91 — Kauravas invite Krishna to dinner. Krishna’s refusal. 
Krishna goes for meal to Vidur. 

92. Adhya. 92 — Vidur tells Krishna that he does not like his going among 
the Kauravas. 

93 Adhya. 93 — Krishna tells Vidura not all the Kauravas can hurt him. 
I have come only because Shama is Punnyakarak. 

94. Adhya. 94 — Krishna enters the assembly Hall of the Kauravas. 

95. Adhya. 95 — Krishna’s address to the Assembly. He told them pandavas 
are ready for both peace as well as war. Give them half their kingdom. 

96. Adhya. 96 — Jamadgni tells a story against arrogance. 

97. Adhya. 97-105 — Matali Akhyan. 

98. Adhya. 106 — Narada’s advice to Duryodhana. 

99. Adhya. 106-123 — Galava Akhyan. 

100. Adhya. 124 — Dratarashtra tells Krishna to advise Duryodhana. 

101. Adhya. 125 — Bhishma’s advice to Duryodhan. Drona’s support. 
Vidura’s condemnation of Duryodhana. Dhratarashtra’s advice. 

102. Adhya. 126 — Bhishma & Drona advice Duryodhana a second time. 

103. Adhya. 127 — Duryodhana announces not to give anything to the 
Pandavas. 

104. Adhya. 128 — Krishna condemns Duryodhana. Duryodhan leaves 
the Assembly. Dushyasana’s speech. Krishna warns Bhishma. 

104. Adhya. 129 — Dhratarashtra asks Vidur to bring Gandhari to the 
Assembly. Duryodhan comes back — Gandhari asks him to give half the 
Kingdom to Pandavas. 

104. Adhya. 130 — Duryodhana leaves the assembly. His intention to kill 
Krishna. Satyaki informs Dhratarashtra of this secret plot. Srikrishna’s 
speech. Dhratarashtra calls back Duryodhana to the assembly, warns him. 
Vidur’s condemnation. 

105. Adhya. 131 — Bhagwana’s Vishwarup Darshan Dhratarashtra gets 
Divya Chakshu? Krishna leaves the assembly and goes to Kunti. 

106. Adhya. 132 — Krishna tells Kunti what happened in the assembly. 
Kunti tells Krishna war is natural to Kshatriyas. There is no better Dharma 
than that. 

107. Adhya. 133 — Kunti tells Krishna the story of Vidula to reinforce 
her point. 

108. Adhya. 134 — Vidula’s story. 

109. Adhya. 135 — Vidula’s story. 

110. Adhya. 136 — Vidula’s story. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


390 


390 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

111. Adhya. 137 — Kunti’s advice to her sons. Krishna’s advice to Kama 
and his departure to Upapalavya Nagari. 

112. Adhya. 138 — Advice to Duryodhana by Bhishma & Drona. 

113. Adhya. 139 — Bhishma’s sorrow. Drona again advises Duryodhana. 

114. Adhya. 140 — Conversation between Dhratarashtra and Sanjaya. 
Krishna advices Kama’s. 

115. Adhya. 141 — Kama’s reply to Krishna. 

116. Adhya. 142 — Krishna’s assurance to Kama that the Pandava’s will win. 

117. Adhya. 143 — Kama sees bad omens. His determination to finish 
Pandavas. His going home. 

118. Adhya. 144 — Conversation between Vidura and Pratha. Knows 
Duryodhana is determined to fight. Kunti’s sorrow. Her wish to tell Kama 
his origin. Kunti goes to the bank of the river. 

119. Adhya. 145 — Kunti meets Kama and tells him his origin and request 
him to join the Pandavas. 

120. Adhya. 146 — Surya supports the proposal of Kunti. Kama rejects it. 
Promises to save all the Pandavas except Arjuna. 

121. Adhya. 147 — Krishna goes to Pandavas. Yudhistir asks what happened 
in the Kaurava Sabha. 

122. Adhya. 147, 148, 149, 150 — Krishna relates the whole story. 

123. Adhya. 151 — Appointment of Senapati for the Pandavas Army. Entry 
of Pandava’s Army in Kurushetra. 

124. Adhya. 152 — Description of Pandavas arrangement for supply to 
the Army. 

125. Adhya. 153 — Arrangement on Kaurava’s side. Our army must enter 
Kurushetra tomorrow early morning. 

126. Adhya. 154 — Dharma’s fear of fall from his moral rectitude by going 
to war. Krishna satisfied him. Arjuna said you must fight. 

127. Adhya. 155 — Description of Duryodhan’s army. 

128. Adhya. 156 — Bhishma is made Senapati of the Kaurava’s army. 
Kama is offended. His decision not to take command till Bhishma is dead. 
Kaurava’s Army enters Kurushetra. 

129. Adhya. 157 — Krishna becomes commander of Pandava’s Army. 

130. Balram goes on Pilgrimage saying I do not like the Kauravas destroyed. 

131. Adhya. 158 — Rukmi neither wanted by Arjuna nor by Duryodhana 
goes home. 

132. Adhya. 159 — Conversation between Sanjaya and Dhratarashtra. He 
blames Dhratarashtra. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


391 


ANALYTICAL NOTES OF VIRAT PARVA & UDYOG PARVA 391 

133. Adhya. 160 — Pandava’s Army on the bank of the Hiranyavati 
river. Duryodhan sends offensive messages to Pandavas and Krishna 
saying fight if you can. 

134. Adhya. 161. Uluka goes with the messages. 

135. Adhya. 162 — Angry Pandavas send back angry messages. They 
give order that the war will start tomorrow. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


392 


CHAPTER 15 

Brahmins Versus Kshatriyas 


This manuscript consists of 43 foolscap typed pages. All the loose 
pages are tagged. The original title, ‘Brahmins and Kshatriyas 
and the Counter-Revolution’ has been modified in Dr. Ambedkar’s 
hand-writing as ‘Brahmins Versus Kshatriyas’ on the title page. 
The essay seems to be complete. — Editors. 

The sacred literature of the Hindus contains many cases of conflicts 
between the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas and even of sanguinary wards 
between the two. 

The first case reported was that of the King Vena. Vena was a 
Kshatriya King. His conflict with the Brahmins has been referred to in 
various authorities. The following account is taken from the Harivansa. 

“Hhere was formerly a Prajapati (lord of creatures), a protector of 
righteousness, called Anga, of the race of Atrai, and resembling him 
in power. His son was the Prajapati Vena, who was but indifferently 
skilled in duty, and was born of Sunitha, the daughter of Mrityu. This 
son of the daughter of Kala (Death), owing to the taint derived from 
his maternal grand-father, threw his duties behind his back, and lived 
in covetousness under the influence of desire. This king established an 
irreligious system of conduct; transgressing the ordinances of the Veda, 
he was devoted to lawlessness. In his reign men lived without study 
of the sacred books and without the Vashatkara, and the gods had no 
some-libations to drink at sacrifices.” 

No sacrifice or oblation shall be offered, — such was the ruthless 
determination of that Prajapati, as the time of his destruction 
approached. T, he declared, ‘am the object, and the performer of 
sacrifice, and the sacrifice itself; it is to me that sacrifice should 
be presented, and oblations offered.’ This transgressor of the rules 
of duty, who arrogated to himself what was not his due, was then 


1 Muir Vol. I. p. 302-303. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


393 


BRAHMINS VERSUS KSHATRIYAS 393 

addressed by all the great Rishis, headed by Marichi: “We are about to 
consecrate ourselves for a ceremony which shall last for many years; 
practise not unrighteousness, of Vena; this is not the eternal rule of 
duty. Thou art in every deed a Prajapati of Atri’s race and thou hast 
engaged to protect thy subject.’ The foolish Vena, ignorant of what was 
right, laughingly answered those great Rishis who had so addressed him: 
“Who but myself is the ordainer of duty ? or whom ought I to obey ? 
Who on earth equals me in sacred knowledge, in process, in austere 
fervour, in truth? Ye who are deluded and senseless know not that I 
am the source of all beings and duties. Hesitate not to believe that I, 
if I willed, could turn up the earth, or deluge it with water, or close 
up heaven and earth.’ When owing to his delusion and arrogance Vena 
could not be governed, then the mighty Rishis becoming licensed, seized 
the vigorous and struggling king, and rubbed his left thigh. From this 
thigh, so rubbed, was produced a black man, very short in stature, who, 
being alarmed, stood with joined hands. Seeing that he was agitated, 
Atri said to him ‘Sit down’ (Nishida). He became the founder of the race 
of the Nishadas, and also progenitor of the Dhivaras (Fishermen), who 
sprang from the corruption of Vena.’ 

The second case is that of Pururavas. Pururavas is another Kshatriya 
King, son of Ila and grandson of Manu Vaivasvata. He came in conflict 
with the Brahman’s the following account of which appears in the Adi 
Parva of the Mahabharata: 

‘^Subsequently the wise Pururavas was born of Ila who, as we have 
heard was both his father and his mother. Ruling over thirteen islands 
of the ocean, and surrounded by beings who were all superhuman, 
himself a man of great renown, Pururavas, intoxicated by his prowess, 
engaged in a conflict with the Brahmans, and robbed them of their jewels, 
although they loudly remonstrated. Sanatkumara came from Brahma’s 
heaven, and addressed to him an admonition, which however, he did 
not regard. Being then straightway cursed by the incenses Rishis, he 
perished, this covetous monarch, who, through piece of power, had lost 
his understanding.” 

The third and a somewhat serious conflict was that between King 
Nahusha and the Brahmins. Nahusha is the grandson of Pururavas. The 
story is told in two places in the Mahabharata once in the Vanaparvan 
and a second time in the Udyogaparvan. The following account is taken 
from the Udyogaparvan of the Mahabharata: 

“ 1 2 After his slaughter of the demon Vritta, Indra became alarmed 
at the idea of having taken the life of a Brahman (for Vritta was 

1 Muir Vol. I, p. 307. 

2 Muir Vol. I, p. 310-313. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


394 


394 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

regarded as such) and hid himself in the waters. In consequence 
of the disappearance of the king of the gods, all affairs, celestial 
as well as terrestrial, fell into confusion. The Rishis and gods 
then applied to Nahusha to be their king. After the first excusing 
himself on the plea of want of power, Nahusha at length, in 
compliance with their solicitations, accepted the high function. 
Upto the period of his elevation he had led a virtuous life, but he 
now became addicted to amusement and sensual pleasure, ‘and 
even aspired to the possession of Indrani, Indra’s wife, whom he 
had happened to see. The queen resorted to the Angiras Vrihaspati, 
the preceptor of the gods, who engaged to protect her. Nahusha 
was greatly incensed on hearing of this interference; but the gods 
endeavoured to pacify him, and pointed out the immorality of 
appropriating another person’s wife. Nahusha, however, would 
listen to no remonstrance, and insisted that in his adulterous 
designs he was no worse than Indra himself.” 

“The renowned Ahalya, a rishi’s wife, was formerly corrupted 
by Indra in her husband’s lifetime. Why was he not prevented 
by you? And many barbarous acts, and unrighteous deeds, and 
frauds were perpetrated of old by Indra; Why was he not prevented 
by you?” The gods, urged Nahusha, then went to bring Indrani; 
but Vrihaspati would not give her up. At his recommendation, 
however, she solicited Nahusha for some delay, till she should 
ascertain what had become of her husband. This request was 
granted.” Indrani now went in search of her husband; and by the 
help of Upasruti (the goddess of night and revealer of secrets) 
discovered him existing in a very subtile form in the stem of a 
lotus growing in a lake situated in a continent within an ocean 
north of the Himalayas. She made known to him the wicked 
intentions of Nahusha, and entreated him to exert his power, 
rescue her from danger, and resume his dominion. Indra declined 
any immediate interposition on the plea of Nahusha’s superior 
strength; but suggested to his wife a device by which the usurper 
might be hurled from his position. She was recommended to say 
to Nahusha that “if he would visit her on a celestial vehicle 
borne by Rishis, she would with pleasure submit herself to him.” 

“I desire for thee, king of the gods, a vehicle hitherto unknown, 
such as neither Vishnu, nor Rudra, nor the Asuras, nor the 
Rakshases employ. Let the eminent Rishis, all united, bear thee, 
lord, in a car: this idea pleases me.” Nahusha receives favourably 
this appeal to his vanity, and in the course of his reply thus gives 
utterance to his self-congratulation: “He is a personage of no mean 
prowess who makes the Munis his bearers. I am a fervid devotee of 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


395 


BRAHMINS VERSUS KSHATRIYAS 

great might, lord of the past, the future, and the present. If I 
were angry the world would no longer stand; on me everything 

depends Wherefore, O goddess, I shall, without doubt, carry 

out what you propose. The seven Rishis, and all the Brahman- 
rishis, shall carry me. Behold, beautiful goddess, my majesty and 
my prosperity.” The narrative goes on: “Accordingly this wicked 
being, irreligious, violent, intoxicated by the force of conceit, 
and arbitrary in his conduct, attached to his car the Rishis who 
submitted to his command, and compelled them to bear him.” 
Indrani then again resorts to Vrihaspati, who assures her that 
vengeance will soon overtake Nahusha for his presumption, and 
promises that he will himself perform a sacrifice with a view to 
the destruction of the oppressor, and the discovery of Indra’s 
lurking place. Agni is then sent to discover and bring Indra to 
Vrihaspati; and the latter, on Indra’s arrival, informs him of all 
that had occurred during his absence. While Indra, with Kuvera, 
Yama, Soma and Varuna was devising means for the destruction 
of Nahusha, the sage Agastya came up, congratulated Indra on 
the fall of his rival, and proceeded to relate how it had occurred: 

“Wearied with carrying the sinner Nahusha the eminent 
divine-rishis, and the spotless Brahman-rishis, asked that divine 
personage Nahusha (to solve) a difficulty; “Dost thou, O Vasava, 
most excellent of conquerors, regard as authoritative or not those 
Brahmana texts which are recited at the immolation of kine?” 
‘No’, replied Nahusha, whose understanding was enveloped in 
darkness. The Rishis rejoined: ‘Engaged in unrighteousness, thou 
attainest not unto righteousness: these texts, which were formerly 
uttered by great Rishis, are regarded by us as authoritative.’ 
Then (proceeds Agastya) disputing with the Munis, Nahusha, 
impelled by unrighteousness, touched me on the head with 
his foot. In consequence of this the king’s glory was smitten 
and his prosperity departed. When he had instantly become 
agitated and oppressed with fear, I said to him,’ Since thou, O 
fool, contemnest that sacred text, always held in honour, which 
has been composed by former sages, and employed by Brahman- 
rishis, and has touched my head with thy foot, and employest the 
Brahma — like the irresistible Rishis as bearers to carry thee, — 
therefore, shorn of thy lusture, and all thy merit exhausted, sink 
down, sinner, degraded from heaven to earth. For ten thousand 
years thou shalt crawl in the form of a huge serpent. When 
that period is completed, thou shalt again ascend to heaven.’ 
So fell that wicked wretch from the sovereignty of the gods. 
Happily, O Indra, we shall now prosper, for the enemy of the 


395 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


396 


396 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Brahmans has been smitten. Take possession of the three worlds, 
and protect their inhabitants, 0 husband of Sachi (Indrani) subduing 
thy senses, overcoming thine enemies, and celebrated by the great 
Rishis.” 

The fourth case is of King Nimi. Nimi was one of the sons of Ikshvaku. 
The facts of his conflict with the Brahmans are related in the Vishnu 
Purrana which says: 

‘^Nimi had requested the Brahman Rishi Vashistha to officiate 
at a sacrifice, which was to last a thousand years. Vashistha in 
reply pleaed a pre-engagement to Indra for five hundred years, but 
promised to return at the end of that period. The king made no 
remark, and Vashistha went away, supposing that he had assented 
to his arrangement. On his return, however, the priest discovered 
that Nimi had retained Gautama (who was, equally with Vashistha, 
a Brahmin-rishi) and others to perform the sacrifice; and being 
incensed at the neglect to give him notice of what was intended, he 
cursed the king, who was then asleep, to lose his corporeal form. 
When Nimi awoke and learnt that he had been cursed without 
any previous warning, he retorted by uttering a similar curse on 
Vashistha, and then died. Nimi’s body was emblamed. At the close 
of the sacrifice which he had begun, the gods, were willing, on the 
intercession of the priests, to restore him to life, but he declined 
the offer; and was placed by the deities, according to his desire, 
in the eyes of all living creatures. It is in consequence of this 
that they are always opening and shutting (nimisha means “The 
twinkling of the eye”). 

The fifth case relates to the conflict between Vashishtha and 
Vishvamitra. Vashishtha was a Brahmin priest. Vishavamitra was a 
Kshatriya. His great ambition was to become a Brahmin. The following 
episode reported from the Ramayana explains the reasons why he became 
anxious to become a Brahmin. 

“ 2 There was formerly, we are told, a king called Kusa, son of 
Prajapati, who had a son called Kusanabha, who was father of 
Gadhi, the father of Vishvamitra. The latter ruled the earth for 
many thousand years. On one occasion, when he was making a 
circuit of the earth, he came to Vashishtha’s hermitage, the pleasant 
abode of many saints, sages, and holy devotees, where, after all first 
declining, he allowed himself to be hospitability entertained with his 
followers by the son of Brahma. Vishvamitra, however, coveting the 
wonderous cow, which had supplied all the dainties of the feast, first 


Muir Vol. I, pp. 316. 
Muir Vol. I, pp. 397-400. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


397 


BRAHMINS VERSUS KSHATRIYAS 

of all asked that she should be given to him in exchange for a 
hundred thousand common cows, adding that “she was a gem, 
that gems were the property of the King, and, therefore, the 
cow owas his by right.” On this price being refused, the King 
advances immensely in his offers, hut all without effect. He then 
proceeds very ungratefully, and tyrannically, it must be allowed — 
to have the cow removed by force, but she breaks away from his 
attendants, and rushes back to her master, complaining that he 
was deserting her. He replies that he was not deserting her, hut 
that the king was much more powerful than he. She answers, 
‘Men do not ascribe strength to a Kshatriya: the Brahmans are 
stronger. The strength of Brahmins is divine, and superior to 
that of Kshatriyas. Thy strength is immeasurable. Vishvamitra, 
though of great vigour, is not more powerful than thou. Thy 
energy is invincible. Commission me, who have been acquired 
by thy Brahmanical power, and I will destroy the pride, and 
force, and attempt of this wicked prince.” She accordingly by 
her bellowing creates hundred of Pahalvas, who destroy the 
entire host of Vishvamitra, but are slain by him in their turn. 
Sakas and Yavanas, of great power and valour, and well armed, 
were then produced, who consumed the king’s soldiers, but 
were routed by him. The cow then calls into existence by her 
bellowing, and from different parts of her body, other warriors of 
various tribes, who again destroyed Vishvamitra’s entire army, 
foot soldiers, elephants, horses, chariots, and all. A hundred of 
the monarch’s sons, armed with various weapons, then rushed 
in great fury on Vashishtha, but were all reduced to ashes in a 
moment by the blast of that sage’s mouth. Vishvamitra, being 
thus utterly vanquished and humbled, appointed one of his sons 
to be regent, and travelled to the Himalaya, where he betook 
to austerities, and thereby obtained a vision of Mahadeva, who 
at his desire revealed to him the science of arms in all its 
branches, and gave him celestial weapons with which, elated 
and full of price, he consumed the hermitage of Vashishtha, 
and put its inhabitants to flight. Vashishtha then threatens 
Vishvamitra and uplifts his Brahmanical mace. Vishvamitra, too, 
raises his fiery weapon and calls out to his adversary to stand. 
Vashishtha bids him to show his strength and boasts that he 
will soon humble his pride. He asks: “What comparison is there 
between a Kshatriya’s might and the might of a Brahman? 
Behold, thou contemptible Kshatriya, my divine Brhmanical 
power.’ The dreadful fiery weapon uplifted by the son of Gadhi 
was then quenched by the rod of the Brahman, as fire is by 
water.” Many and various other celestial missiles, as the nooses of 


397 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


398 


398 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Brahma, Kala (Time), and Varuna, the discuss of Vishnu, and the 
trident of Shiva, were hurled by Vishvamitra at his antagonist, but 
the son of Brahma swallowed them up in his all-devouring mace. 
Finally, to the intense consternation of all the gods, the warrior shot 
off the terrific weapon of Brahma; but this was equally ineffectual 
against the Brahmanical sage. Vashishtha had now assumed a 
direful appearance. “Jets of fire mingled with smoke darted from 
the pores of his body; the Brahmanical mace blazed in his hand 
like a smokeless mundane conflagration, or a second sceptre of 
Yama.” Being appeased, however, by the munis, who proclaimed 
his superiority to his rival, the sage stayed his vengeance; and 
Vishvamitra exclaimed with a groan: “Shame on a Kshatriya’s 
strength: the strength of a Brahman’s might alone is strength; by 
the single Brahmanical mace all my weapons have been destroyed.” 

No alternative now remains to the humilated monarch, but either 
to acquiesce in this help less inferiority, or to work out his own 
elevation to the Brahmanical order. He embraces the latter 
alternative: “Having pondered well this defeat, I shall betake myself, 
with composed senses and mind, to strenuous austere fervour, which 
shall exalt me to the rank of a Brahman.” Intensely vexed and 
mortified, groaning and full of hatred against his enemy, he travelled 
with his queen to the south, and carried his resolution into effect. 

At the end of a thousand years Brahma appeared, and announced 
that he had conquered the heaven of royal sages (rajarshis): and, 
in consequence of his austere fervour, he was recognised as having 
attained that rank.” 

The conflict seems to have begun in the reign of King Sudas who 
belonged to the line of Ikshavaku. Vashishtha was the hereditary priest 
of King Sudas. For some reason which is not very clearly stated Sudas 
appointed Vishvamitra as his family priest. This brought about a conflict 
between Vishvamitra and Vashishtha. This conflict once started raged 
on for a long time. 

The conflict between the two took a peculiar turn. If Vishvamitra was 
involved in a dispute Vashishtha came into the fray and sided with his 
opponent. If Vishvamitra was involved in dispute Vashishtha entered 
into fray and sided with Vishvamitra as opponent. It was a case of one 
persecuting the other. 

The first such episode is that of Satyavrata otherwise called Trishanku. 
The story as told in the Harivamsha is as follows: 

‘^Meanwhile Vashishtha, from the relation subsisting between 
the King (Satyavrata’s father) and himself, a disciple and spiritual 


1 Muir Vol. I. pp. 177-378. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


399 


BRAHMINS VERSUS KSHATRIYAS 399 

preceptor, governed the city of Ayodhya, the country, and the interior 
apartments of the royal palace. But Satyavrata, whether through 
folly or the force of destiny, cherished constantly an increased 
indignation against Vashishtha, who for a (proper) reason had not 
interposed to prevent his exclusion from the royal power by his 
father. ‘The formulas of the marriage ceremonial are only binding,’ 
said Satyavrata, ‘when the seventh step has been taken, and this 
had not been done when I seized the damsel: still Vashishtha, 
who knows the precepts of the law, does not come to my aid.’ 

Thus Satyavrata was incensed in his mind against Vashishtha, 
who however, had acted from a sense of what was right. Nor did 
Satyavrata understand (he propriety of) that silent penance imposed 

upon him by his father When he had supported this arduous 

rite, (the supposed that) he had redeemed his family position. 

The venerable muni Vashishtha did not, however, (as has been 
said) prevent his father from setting him aside, but resolved to 
install his son as King. When the powerful prince Satyavrata had 
endured the penance for twelve years, he beheld, when he was 
without flesh to eat, the milch cow of Vashishtha which yielded 
all objects of desire; and under the influence of anger; delusion, 
and exhaustion, distressed by hunger, and failing in the ten duties 

he slew and both partook of her flesh himself, and gave it 

to Vishvamitra’s sons to eat. Vashishtha hearing of this, became 
incensed against him”, and imposed on his the name of Trisanku 
as he had committed three sins. On his return home, Vishvamitra 
was gratified by the support which his wife had received, and 
offered Trisanku the choice of a boon. When this proposal was 
made, Trisanku chose the boon of ascending bodily to heaven. All 
apprehension from the twelve year’s drought being now at an end, 
the muni (Vishvamitra) installed Trisanku in his father’s kingdom, 
and offered sacrifice on his behalf. The mighty Kaustka then, in 
spite of the resistance of the gods and of Vashishtha, 1 exalted the 
king alive to heaven.” 

2. As stated in the Harivamsa: 

“ 2 In consequence of the wickedness which had been committed, 
Indra did not rain for a period of twelve years. At that time 
Vishvamitra had left his wife and children and gone to practise 
austerities on the sea-shore. His wife, driven to extremity by want, 
was on the point of selling her second son for a hundred cows, in 

1 As stated in another place in the Harivamsa Trisanku had been expelled from his home 
by his father for the offence of carrying off the young wife of one of the citizens under the 
influence of a criminal passion and Vashishtha did not interfere to prevent his banishment. 
It is to this that the text refers. 

2 Muir Vol. I. pp. 376-77. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


400 


400 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


order to support the others; but this arrangement was stopped 
by the interventions of Satyavrata, who liberated the son when 
bound, and maintained the family by providing them with the 
flesh of wild animals; and according to his father’s injunction, 
consecrated himself for the performance of a silent penance for 
twelve years.” 


The next episode in which they appear on opposite sides is that of 
Harishchandra the son of Trisanku. The story is told in the Vishnu 
Purana and in the Markendeya Purana. This is how the story runs: 


“On one occasion, when hunting the king heard a sound of female 
lamentation which proceeded, it appears, from the sciences who 
were becoming mastered by the austerely fervid sage Vishvamitra, 
in a way they had never been before by anyone else; and were 
consequently crying out in alarm at his superiority. In fulfilment 
of his duty as a Kshatriya to defend the weak, and inspired by 
the god Ganesha, who had entered into him, Harishchandra 
exclaimed, “What sinner is this who is binding fire in the hem of 
his garment, white, I, his lord, am present, resplendent with force 
and fiery vigour?’ He shall to-day enter on his long sleep, pierced 
in all his limbs by arrows, which, by their discharge from my 
bow, illuminate all the quarters of the firmament.” Vishvamitra 
was provoked by this address. In consequence of his wrath the 
Sciences instantly perished, and Harishchandra, trembling like 
the leaf of an Asvattha tree, submissively represented that he had 
merely done his duty as a king, which he defined as consisting 
in the bestowl of gifts on eminent Brahmins and other persons 
of slender means, the protection of the timid, and war against 
enemies. Vishvamitra hereupon demands a gift as a Brahman 
intent upon receiving one. The. king offers him whatsoever he may 
ask: Gold, his own son, wife, body, like kingdom, good fortune. 
The saint first requires the present for the Rajasuya sacrifice. 
On this being promised, and still more offered, he asks for the 
empire of the whole earth, including everything but Harishchandra 
himself, his wife and son, and his virtue which follows its 
posses or wherever he goes.” “Harishchandra joyfully agrees. 
Vishvamitra then requires him to strip off all his ornaments, to 
clothe himself in the bark of trees, and to quit the kingdom with 
his wife Saviya (Taramati) and his son. When he is departing 
the sage stops him and demands payment of his yet unpaid 
sacrificial fee. The king replies that he has only the persons of 
his wife, his son, and himself left. Vishvamitra insists that he 
must nevertheless pay; and that “unfulfilled promises of gifts to 
Brahmans bring destruction.” The unfortunate prince, after being 
threatened with a curse, engages to make the payment in a month; 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


401 


BRAHMINS VERSUS KSHATRIYAS 

and commences his journey with a wife unused to such fatigues, 
amid the universal lamentations of his subjects. While he 
lingers, listening to their affectionate remonstrances against 
his desertion of his kingdom, Vishvamitra, comes up and being 
incensed at the delay and the King’s apparent hesitation, strikes 
the queen with his staff, as she is dragged on by her husband. 
Harishchandra then proceeded with his wife and little son to 
Benares, imagining that this divine city, as the special property 
of Siva, could not be possessed by any mortal. Here he found the 
relentless Vishvamitra waiting for him, and ready to press his 
demand for the payment of his sacrificial gift, even before the 
expiration of the full period of grace. In this extremity Saivya 
the queen suggests with a sobbing voice that her husband should 
sell her. On hearing this proposal Harishchandra swoons, then 
recovers, utters lamentations, and swoons again, and his wife, 
seeing his said condition, swoon also. While they are in a state 
of unconsciousness, their famished child exclaims in distress, 
“O father, father, give me bread; O mother, mother give me 
food: hunger overpowers me and my tongue is parched.” At this 
moment Vishvamitra returns, and after recalling Harishchandra to 
consciousness by spinkling water over him, again urges payment 
of the present. The king again swoons, and is again restored. The 
sag threatens to curse him if his engagement is not fulfilled by 
sunset. Being now pressed by his wife, the King agrees to sell 
her ading, however, “If my voice can utter such a wicked word, 
I do not what the most inhuman wretches cannot perpetrate.” 
He then goes into the city and in selfacusing language offers his 
queen for sale as a slave. A rich old Brahman offers to buy her 
at a price corresponding to her value, to do his household work. 
Seeing his mother dragged away, the child ran after her, his eyes 
dimmed with tears, and crying ‘mother’. The Brahman purchaser 
kicked him when he came up; but he would not let his mother 
go, and continued crying ‘mother, mother.’ The queen then said to 
the Brahman, “Be so kind, my master, as to but also this child, 
as without him I shall prove to thee but a useless purchase. Be 
thus merciful to me in my wretchedness, unite me with my son, 
like a cow to her calf.” The Brahman agrees: “Take this money 
and give me the boy.” After the Brahman had gone out of sight 
with his purchases, Vishvamitra again appeared and renewed 
his demands; and when the afflicted Harishchanda offered him 
the small sum he had obtained by the sale of his wife and son, 
he angrily replied, “If, miserable Kshatriya, thou thinkest this 
a sacrificial gift befitting my deserts, thou shalt soon beheld the 
transcendent power of my ardent austere fervour, of my spotless 


401 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


402 


402 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Brahmanhood of my terrible majesty, and of my holy study. 
Harishchandra promises an additional gift, and Vishvamitra 
allows him the remaining quarter of the day for its liquidation. 
On the terrified and afflicted prince offering himself for sale, in 
order to gain the mean of meeting this cruel demand, Dharma 
(Righteousness) appears in the form of a hideous and offensive 
Chandala, and agrees to buy him at his own price, large or small. 
Harishchandra declines such a degrading servitude, and declares 
that he would rather be consumed by the fire of his persecutor’s 
curse than submit to such a fate. Vishvamitra however again comes 
on the scene, asks why he does not accept the large sum offered 
by the Chandala; and, when he pleads in excuse his descent from 
the solar race, threatens to fulminate a curse against him if he 
does not accept that method of meeting his liability. Harishchandra 
implores that he may be spared this extreme of degradation, and 
offers to become Vishvamitra’s slave in payment of the residue 
of his debt; whereupon the sage rejoins, “If thou art my slave, 
then I sell thee as such to the Chandala for a hundred millions 
of money.” 

“The Chandala, delighted, pays down the money, and carries 
off Harishchandra, bound beaten, confused and afflicted, to his 
own place of abode. Harishchandra is sent by the Chandala to 
steal grave clothes in a cemetary and is told that he will receive 
two-sixths goind to his masters, and one-sixth to the King. In 
this horrid spot, and in this degrading occupation, he spent in 
great misery, twelve months, which seemed to him like a hundred 
years. He then falls asleep and has a series of dreams suggested 
by the life he had been leading. After he awoke, his wife came 
to the cemetary to perform the obsequies of their son, who had 
died from the bite of a serpent. At first the husband and wife did 
not recognize each other, from the change in appearance which 
had been brought upon them by their miseries. Harishchandra 
however, soon discovered from the tenor of her lamentations 
that it is his wife, and falls into a swoon; as the queen does also 
when she recognizes her husband. When consciousness returns, 
they both break out into lamentations, the father bewailing in a 
touching strain the loss of his son, and the wife the degradation 
of the King. She then falls on his neck, embraces him, and asks 
“whether all this is a dream, or a reality, as she is utterly be 
wildered”, and adds, that “if it be a reality, then righteousness 
is unvailing to those who practise it.” After hesitating to devote 
himself to death on his son’s funeral pyre without receiving 
his master’s leave, Harishchandra resolves to do so, braving 
all the consequences, and consoling himself with the hopeful 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


403 


BRAHMINS VERSUS KSHATRIYAS 

anticipation: “If I have given gifts, and offered sacrifices an 
gratified my religious teachers, then may I be reunited with 
my son and with thee (my wife) in another world.” The queen 
determines to die in the same manner. When Harishchandra, 
after placing his son’s body on the funeral pile, is meditating 
on the Lord Shri Narayan krishna, the supreme spirit, all the 
gods arrive, headed by Dharma (righteousness), and accompanied 
by Vishvamitra. Dharma entreats the king to desist from his 
rash intention; and Indra announces to him that he, his wife, 
and son have conquered heaven by their good works. Amrosia, 
the antidote of death, and flowers are rained by the god from 
the sky; and the king’s son is restored to life and the bloom of 
youth. The king, adorend with celestial clothing and garlands, 
and the queen, embrace their son. Harishchandra, however 
declares that he cannot go to heaven till he has received his 
master the Chandala’s permission, and has paid him a ransom. 
Dharma then reveals to the king that it was he himself who 
had miraculously assumed the form of a Chandala. The king 
next objects that he cannot depart unless his faithful subjects, 
who are shares in his merits, are allowed to acompany him 
to heaven, at least for one day. This request is granted by 
Indra; and after Vishvamitra has inaugurated Rohitasva the 
king’s son to be his successor, Harishchandra, his friends and 
followers, all ascend in company to heaven. Even after this 
great consummation, however, Vashishtha, the family-priest of 
Harishchandra, hearing, at the end of a twelve years’ abode in 
the waters of the Ganges, an account of all that has occured, 
becomes vehementaly incensed at the humiliation inflicted on 
the excellent monarch, whose virtues and devotion to the gods 
and Brahmans he celebrates, declares that his indignation had 
not been so great roused even when his own hundred sons had 
been slain by Vishvamitra, and in the following words dooms the 
latter to be transformed into crane. Wherefore that wicked man, 
enemy of the Brahmans, smitten by my curse, shall be expelled 
from the society of intelligent beings, and losing his understanding 
shall be transformed into a Vaka.” Vishvamitra reciprocates the 
curse, and changes Vashishtha into a bird of the species called 
Ari. In their new shapes the two have a furious fight, the Ari 
being of the portentous height of two thousand yojanas = 18,000 
miles, and the Vaka of 3090 yojanas. The first assail each other 
with their wings; then the Vaka smites his antagonist in the 
same manner, while the Ari strikes with his talons. Falling 
mountains, overturned by the blasts of wind raised by the flapping 
of their wings, shake the whole earth, the waters of the ocean 


403 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


404 


404 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

overflow, the earth itself, thrown off its perpendicular slopes downwards 
patala, the lower regions. Many creatures perish by these various 
convulsions. Attracted by the dire disorder, Brahma arrives, attended 
by all the gods, on the spot, and command the comptants to desist from 
their fray. They were too fiercely infuiriated to regard this injunction; 
but Brahma put an end to the conflict by restoring them to their 
natural forms, and conselling them to be reconciled. 

The next episode in which they came in as opponents is connected 
with Ambarish King of Ayodhya. 

x The story relates that Ambarisha was engaged in performing a 
sacrifice, when Indra carried away the victim. The priest said that this 
ill-omened event had occurred owing to the king’s had administration, 
and would call for a great expiation, unless a human victim could be 
produced. After a long search the royal rishi (Ambarisha) came upon the 
Brahman-rishi Richika, a descendent of Bhrigu, and asked him to sell 
one of his sons for a victim, at the price of a hundred thousand cows. 
Richika answered that he would not sell his eldest son; and his wife 
added that she would not sell the youngest: eldest sons” she observed, 
“being generally the favourites of their fathers, and youngest sons of 
their mothers.” The second son, Sunassepna, then said that in that 
case he regarded himself as the one who was to be sold, and desired 
the king to remove him. The hundred thousand cows, with ten millions 
of gold pieces and heaps of jewels, were paid down, and Sunassepa 
carried away. As they were passing through Pushkara Sunassepa 
beheld his maternal uncle Vishvamitra who was engaged in austerities 
there with other rishis, threw himself into his arms, and implored his 
assistance, urging his orphan friendless, and helpless state, as claims 
on the sage’s benevolence. 

“Vishvamitra soothed him: and pressed his own sons to offer 
themselves as victim in the room of Sunassepa. This proposition 
met with no favour from Madhushyanda and the other sons of the 
royal hermit, who answered with haughtiness and derision: “How 
is that thou sacrificest thine own sons, and seekest to rescue those 
of others ? We look upon this as wrong, and like the eating of one’s 
own flesh.” The sage was exceedingly wroth at this disregard of his 
injunction, and doomed his sons to be born in the most degraded 
classes, like Vashishtha’s sons, and to eat dog’s flesh, for a thousand 
years. He then said to Sunassepa: “When thou art bound with 
hallowed cords, decked with a red garland, and annointed with 
unguents, and fastened to the sacrificial post of Vishnu, then address 
thyself to Agni, and sing these two divine verses (gathas), at the 


^uir Vol. I. pp. 405-407. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


405 


BRAHMINS VERSUS KSHATRIYAS 405 

sacrifice of Ambarisha; then shalt thou attain the fulfilment.” Being 
furnished with the two gathas, Sunassepa proposed at once to king 
Ambarisha that they should set out for their destination. When 
bound at the stake to be immolated, dressed in a red garment, “he 
celebrated the two gods, Indra and his younger brother (Vishnu), with 
the excellent verses. The thousand-eyed (Indra) was pleased with the 
secret hymn, and bestowed long life on Sunassepa.” 

The last episode recorded in which the two appear as opponents 
is connected with King Kalmashapada. The episode is recorded in 
the Adi Parva of the Mahabharata. 

‘^Kalmashapada was a King of the race Ikshvaku. Vishvamitra 
wished to be employed by him as his officiating priest; but the king 
preferred Vashishtha.” It happened, however, that the king went out 
to hunt, and after having killed a large quantity of game, he became 
very much fatigued, as well as hungry and thirsty. Meeting Saktri, 
the eldest of Vashishtha’s hundred sons, on the road, he ordered him 
to get out of his way. The priest civilly replied: “The path is mine, O 
King; this is the immemorial law; in all observances the king must 
cede the way to the Brahman.” Neither party would yield, and the 
dispute waxing warmer, the king struck the muni with his whip. The 
muni, resorting to the usual expedient of offended sages, by a curse 
doomed the king to become a man eater. “It happened that at that 
time enmity existed between Vishvamitra and Vashishtha on account of 
their respective claims to be priest to Kalmashapada.” Vishvamitra had 
followed the king; and approached while he was disputing with Saktri. 
Perceiving, however, the son of his rival Vashishtha, Vishvamitra made 
himself invisible, and passed them, watching his opportunity. The 
king began to implore Saktri’s clemency: but Vishvamitra wishing to 
prevent their reconciliation, commanded a Rakshasa (a man- devouring 
demon) to enter into the king. Owing to the conjoint influence of the 
Brahma-rishi’s curse, and Vishvamitra’s command, the demon obeyed 
the injunction. Perceiving that his object was gained, Vishvamitra left 
things to take their course, and absented himself from the country. 
The king having happened to meet a hungry Brahman, and sent 
him, by the hand of his cook (who could procure nothing else), some 
human flesh to eat, was cursed by him also to the same effect as by 
Saktri. The curse, being now augmented in force, took effect, and 
Saktri himself was the first victim, being eaten up by the King. The 
same fate befell all the other sons of Vashishtha at the instigation 
of Vishvamitra. Perceiving Saktri to be dead, Vishvamitra again and 


^uir Vol. I, pp. 415-417. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


406 


406 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

again incited the Rakshasa against the sons of Vashishtha; and 
accordingly the furious demon devoursed those of his sons who 
were younger than Saktri as a lion eats up the small beasts of the 
forest. On hearing of the destruction of his sons by Vishvamitra, 
Vashishtha supported his affliction, as the great mountain 
sustains the earth. He meditated his own destruction, but never 
thought of exterminating the Kausikas. This divine sage hurled 
himself from the summit of Meru, but fell upon the rocks as if 
on a heap of cotton. Escaping alive from his fall, he entered a 
glowing fire in the forest; but the fire, though fiercely blazing, 
not only failed to burn him, but seemed perfectly cool. He next 
threw himself into the sea with a heavy stone attached to his 
neck; but was cast up by the waves on the dry land. He then 
went home to his hermitage; but seeing it empty and desolate, 
he was again overcome by grief and went out; and seeing the 
river Vipasa which was swolen by the recent rains and sweeping 
along many trees torn from its banks, he conceived the design 
of drowning himself into its water, he accordingly tied himself 
firmly with cords, and threw himself in, but the river severing 
his bonds, deposited him unbound (vipasa) on dry land; whence 
the name of the stream, as imposed by the sage. He afterwards 
saw and threw himself into the dreadful Satadru (Sutlej), which 
was full of alligators, etc., and derived its name rushing away in 
a hundred directions on seeing the Brahman brilliant as fire. In 
consequence of this he was once more stranded; and seeing he 
could not kill himself, he went back to his hermitage.” 

There are only particular instances of their general enmity 
towards each other. This general enmity was of a mortal kind so 
much so that Vishvamitra wanted even to murder Vashishtha. This 
is related in the Shalyaparva of the Mahabharata. Says the author 
of the Mahabharata: 

‘^There existed a great enmity, arising from rivalry in 
their austerities, between Vishvamitra and the Brahman 
rishi Vashishtha. Vashishtha had an extensive hermitage in 

Sthanutirtha, to the east of which was Vishvamitra’s These 

two great ascetics were every day exhibiting intense emulation 
in regard to their respective austerities. But Vishvamitra, 
beholding the might of Vashishtha, was the most chagrined; 
and fell into deep thought. The idea of this sage, constant in 
duty (!) was the following: ‘This river Sarasvati will speedily 
bring to me on her current the austere Vashishtha, the most 
eminent of all mutterers of prayers. When that most excellent 
Brahman has come, I shall most assuredly kill him.’ Having thus 


^uir Vol. I, pp. 420-422. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


407 


BRAHMINS VERSUS KSHATRIYAS 

determined, the divine sage Vishvamitra, his eyes reddened by 
anger, called to mind the chief of rivers. She being thus the 
subject of his thoughts, became very anxious, as she knew him 
to be very powerful and very irascible. Then trembling palid, and 
with joined hands, the Sarasvati stood before the chief of munis. 
Like a woman whose husband has been slain, she was greatly 
distressed; and said to him, ‘What shall I do?” The incensed 
muni replied, ‘Bring Vashishtha hither speedily, that I may 
slay him.’ The lotus-eyed goddess, joining her hands trembled 

in great fear, like a creeping plant agitated by the wind” 

Vishvamitra, however, although he saw her condition, repeated 
his command. “The Sarasvati, who knew how sinful was his 
design, and that the might of Vashishtha was unequalled, 
went trembling, and in great dread of being cursed by both 
the sages, to Vashishtha, and told him what his rival had said. 
Vashishtha seeing her emaciated, pale, and anxious, spoke thus: 
‘Deliver thyself, O chief of rivers; carry me unhesitatingly to 
Vishvamitra, lest he curse thee’. Hearing these words of the 
merciful sage, the Sarasvati considered how she could act most 
wisely. She reflected, ‘Vashishtha has always shown me great 
kindness; I must seek his welfare.’ Then obsering the Kausika 
sage praying and sacrificing on her brink, she regarded that as 
a good opportunity, and swept away the bank by the force of her 
current. In this way the son of Mitra and Varuna (Vashishtha) 
was carried down; and while he was being borne along, he thus 
celebrated the river: ‘Thou, O Sarasvati, issuest from the lake 
of Brahma, and pervadest the whole world with thy excellent 
streams. Residing in the sky, thou dischargest water into the 
colouds. Thou alone art all waters. By these we study.’ ‘Thou 
art nourishment, radiance, fame, perfection, intellect, light. Thou 
art speech; thou art Svaha; this world is subject to thee. Thou, 
in fourfold form, dwellest in all creatures’ 

Beholding Vashishtha brought near by the Sarasvati, 
Vishvamitra searched for a weapon with which to make an end 
of him. Perceiving his anger, and dreading lest Brahmanicide 
should ensue, the river promptly carried away Vashishtha in 
an easterly direction; thus fulfilling the commands of both 
sages, but eluding Vishvamitra. Seeing Vashishtha so carried 
away, Vishvamitra, impatient, and enraged by vexation, said 
to her: ‘Since thou, O chief of rivers, hast elued me, and hast 
receded, roll in waves of blood acceptable to the chief of demons,” 
(which are fabled to gloat on blood). “The Sarasvati, being thus 

cursed, flowed for a year in a stream mingled with blood 

Rakshasas came to the place of pilgrimage, where Vashishtha 
had been swept away, and revealed in drinking to satiety 


407 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


408 


408 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the bloody stream in security, dancing and laughing, as if they had 
conquered heaven.” Some rishis who arrived at the spot some time 
after were horrified to see the blood-stained water, and the Rakshasas 
quaffing it, and “made the most strenuous efforts to rescue the 
Sarasvati.” 

The foregoing cases relate to individual conflicts between a 
particular Brahmin and a particular Kshatriya. The cases which 
follow are cases of class or communal conflicts between Brahmins 
on the one hand and the Kshatriyas on the other. They are not 
mere conflicts. Nor is it correct to say that they were like communal 
riots. They were class wars undertaken by one community with 
the avowed intention of exterminating the other root and branch. 
Two such class wars of extermination have been recorded in the 
Mahabharat. The first is a war of the Haihaya Kshatriyas on the 
Bhargava Brahmins. It occurred in the reign of the Haihaya King 
Kritavirya. The following is the description of this war in the 
Adiparvan of the Mahabharat. 

‘^There was a king named Kritavirya, by whose liberality the 
Bhrigu, learned in the Vedas, who officiated as his priest, had been 
greatly enriched with corn, and money. After he had gone to heaven, 
his descendants were in want of money, and came to beg for a supply 
from the Bhrigus, of whose wealth they were aware. Some of the latter 
hid their money under ground, others bestowed it on Brahmans, being 
afraid of the Kshatriyas, while others again gave these last what 
they wanted. It happened, however, that a Kshatriya, while digging 
the ground, discovered some money buried in the house of a Bhrigu. 
The Kshatriyas then assembled and saw this treasure, and, being 
incensed, slew in consequence all the Bhrigus, whom they regarded with 
contempt, down to the children in the womb. The widows, however, fled 
to the Himalaya mountains. One of them concealed her unborn child 
in her thigh. The Kshatriyas, hearing of its existence from a Brahmani 
informant, sought to kill it; but it issued forth from its mother’s 
thigh with lustre, and blinded the persecutors. After wandering about 
bewildered among the mountains for a time, they humbly supplicated 
the mother of the child for the restoration of their sight; but she 
referred them to her wonderful infant Aurva into whom the whole Veda, 
with its six Vedangas, had entered, as the person who (in retaliation 
of the slaughter of his relatives) had robbed them or their eye-sight, 
and who alone could restore it. They accordingly had recourse to 
him, and their eye-sight was restored. Aurva, however, meditated the 
destruction of all living creatures, in revenge for the slaughter of the 


Muir Vol. I. pp. 448-449. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


409 


BRAHMINS VERSUS KSHATRIYAS 409 

Bhrigus, and entered on a course of austerities which alarmed both 
gods, asuras, and men; hut his progenitors (Pitris) themselves appeared, 
and sought to turn him from his purpose by saying that they had no 
desire to be revenged on the Kshatriyas: It was not from weakness 
that the devout Bhrigus overlooked the massacre perpetrated by the 
murderous Kshatriyas. When we became distressed by old age, we 
ourselves desired to be slaughtered by them. The money which was 
buried by someone in a Bhrigu’s house was placed there for the purpose 
of exciting hatred, by those who wished to provoke the Kshatriyas. 
For what had we, who were desiring heaven, to do with money?” They 
add that they hit upon this device because they did not wish to be 
guilty of suicide, and concluded by calling upon Aurva to restrain 
his wrath; and abstain from the sin he was meditating, “Destroy not 
the Kshatriyas, O son, nor the seven worlds. Suppress thy kindled 
anger which nullifies the power of austere-fervour.” Aurva, however, 
replies that he cannot allow his threat to remain unexecuted. His 
anger, unless wreaked upon some other object, will, he says, consume 
himself. And he argues on grounds of justice, expediency, and duty, 
against the clemency which his progenitors recommend. He is, however, 
persuaded by the Pitris to throw the fire of his anger into the sea, 
where they say it will find exercise in assailing the watery element, 
and in this way his threat will be fulfilled.” 

The second class war and which was also a war of extermination 
was declared by the Bhargava Brahmins on the Haihaya Kshatriyas. 
In this the leader of Bhargava Brahmins was one Parashuram. 
The story of the birth of Parashuram is described in the Vishnu 
Purana in the following terms: 

‘^Gadhi’s daughter Satyavati had been given in marriage to an 
old Brahman called Richika, of the family of Bhrigu. In order that 
his wife might bear a son with the qualities of a Brahman, Richika 
had prepared for her a dish of Charu (rice, barley, and pulse, with 
butter and milk) for her to eat; and a similar mess for her mother, 
calculated to make her conceive a son with the character of a warrior. 
Satyavati’s mother, however, persuaded her to exchange messes. She 
was blamed by her husband on her return home for what she had 
done. I quote the words of the original: 

“Sinful woman, what improper deed is this that thou has done? I 
beheld thy body of a very terrible appearance. Thou hast certainly 
eaten the Charu prepared for thy mother. This was wrong. For into 
that Chari I had infused all the endowments of heriosm, vigour, and 


Muir Vol. I. pp. 349-350. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


410 


410 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


roce, whilst into thine I had introduced all these qualities of 
quietude, knowledge, and patnence which constitute the perfection 
of a Brahmin. Since thou hast acted in contravention of my 
design a son shall be born to thee who shall live the dreadful, 
martial, and murderous life of a Kshatriya and thy mother’s 
offspring shall exhibit the peaceful disposition and conduct of a 
Brahman.” As soon as she had heard this, Satyavati fell down 
and seized her husband’s feet, and said, ‘My lord, I have acted 
from ignorance; show kindness to me, let me not have a son 
of the sort thou hast described; if thou pleasest, let me have a 
grandson of that description.’ Subsequently she bore Jamadagni, 
and her mother gave birth to Vishvamitra. Satyavati became the 
river called Kausiki. Jamadagni wedded Renuka, the daughter 
of Renu, of the family of Ikshvaku; and on her he begot a son 
called Parashurama.” 

The following additional details about Parashuram’s family history 
is given in the Venaparvan of the Mahabharata: 

“Mamadagni and Satyavati had five sons, the youngest of whom 
was the repubtable Parasurama. By his father’s command he kills 
his mother (who by the indulgence of impure desire, had fallen 
from her brevious sanctity), after the four elder sons had refused 
this matricidal offen, and had in consequence been deprived of 
reason by their father’s curse. At Parasurama’s desire however, 
his mother is restored by his father to life, and his brothers to 
reason; and he himself is absolved from all the guilt of murder; 
and obtains the boon of invincibility and long life from his father.” 

This second class war took place in the reign of the Haihaya king 
Arjuna the son of King Kartavirya. To understand it correctly it is 
necessary to divide it into two parts for there are two stages in it. 
The trouble began with the Brahmans claiming certain prerogatives 
and powers exclusively for themselves and King — Arjuna scouting 
them in most contemptuous terms. As the Anushasanparvan of the 
Mahabharata puts it. 

“ 2 Then ascending his chariot glorious as the resplendent sun, 
he exclaimed in the intoxication of his prowess, ‘Who is like me in 
fortitude, courage, fame, heriosm, energy, and vigour?’ At the end 
of this speech a bodiless voice on the sky addressed him: ‘Thou 
knowest not, O fool, that a Brahman is better than a Kshatriya. It is 
with the help of the Brahman that the Kshatriya rules his subjects. 
Arjuna answers ‘If I am pleased, I can create, or, if displeased, 
annihilate, living beings; and no Brahman is superior to me in 

1 Muir Vol. I, pp. 450. 

2 Muir Vol. I, pp. 454. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


411 


BRAHMINS VERSUS KSHATRIYAS 411 

act, thought, or word. The first proposition is that the Brahmans 
are superior; the second that the Kshatriyas are superior; both 
of these thou hast stated with their ground, but there is a 
difference between them. The Brahmans are dependent on the 
Kshatriyas, and not the Kshatriyas on the Brahmans; and the 
Kshatriyas on the Brahmans; and the Kshatriyas are eaten 
up by the Brahmans, who wait upon them and only make the 
Vedas a pretence. Justice the protection of the people, has its 
seat in the Kshatriyas. From them the Brahmans derive their 
livelihood; how then can the latter be superior? I always keep in 
subjection to myself those Brahmans, the chief of all beings, who 
subsist on alms, and who have a high opinion of themselves. For 
truth was spoken by that female the Gayatri in the sky. I shall 
subdue all those unruly Brahmans clad in hides. No one in the 
three worlds, god or man can hurl me from my royal authority; 
wherefore I am superior to any Brahman.” 

On hearing this Vayu comes and says to Arjuna: 

“Abandon this sinful disposition, and to obeisance to the 
Brahmans. If thou shalt do them wrong, thy kingdom shall be 
convulsed. They will subdue thee; those powerful men will humble 
thee, and expel thee from thy country’ The king asks him, ‘who 
art thou? Vayu replies, ‘I Vayu, the messenger of the gods, 
and tell thee what is for thy benefit’. Arjuna rejoins, ‘Oh thou 
displayest to-day a great warmth of devotion to the Brahmans. 

But say that a Brahman is like (any other) earth-born creature. 

Or say that this most excellent Brahman is something like the 
wind. But fire is like the waters, or the sun, or the sky.’ 

Vayu then adduces various instances in which the superiority 
of the Brahmins has been mainfested. Arjuna then drops his 
hostility against the Brahmins and becomes their friend. In the 
Anushasanparva he is reported to have said: 

“ 1 2 I live altogether and always for the sake of the Brahmans. I am 
devoted to the Brahmans, and do obeisance to them continually. 

And it is through the favour of Dattatreya (A Brahman) that I 
have obtained all this power and high renown, and that I have 
practised righteousness.” 


1 Muir Vol. I. pp. 454. 

2 Muir Vol. I. pp. 473 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


412 


412 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

It is in the second stage that Parashuram comes on the scene and 
extreminates the Kshatriyas. The story is told in the Shantiparvan 
in the following terms: 

‘ ll Being of a meek, pious, kind and charitable turn of mind, the 
valiant Arjuna thought nothing of the curse; but his sons, who were 
of an arrogant and barbarous disposition, became the cause of its 
resulting in his death. Without their father’s knowledge they took away 
Jamadagni’s calf; and in consequence Parasurama attacked Arjuna and 
cut off his arms.” His son retaliated by killing Jamadagni. Parashurama 
incensed at the slaughter of his father, having vowed in consequence 
to sweep away all Kshatriyas from the earth, seized his weapons; 
and slaying all the sons and grandsons of Arjuna, with thousands of 
the Haihayas, he turned the earth into a mass of ensanguined mud. 
Having thus cleared the earth of Kshatriyas, he became penetrated 
by deep compassion and retired to the forest. After some thousands 
of years had elapsed, the hero, naturally irascible, was taunted by 
Paravsu, the son of Raibhya and grandson of Vishvamitra, in a public 
assembly in these words: ‘Are not these virtuous men, Pratardana 
and the others, who are assembled at the sacrifice in the city of 
Yayati, — are they not Kshatriyas? Thou hast failed to execute thy 
threat, and vainly boastest in the assembly. Thou has withdrawn to 
the mountain from fear of those valiant Kshatriyas, while the earth 
has again become overrrun by hundred of their race.’ Hearing these 
words, Rama seized his weapons. The hundreds of Kshatriyas who had 
before been spared had now grown powerful kings. These, however, 
Parasurama now slew with their children, and all the numerous 
infants then unborn as they came into the world. Some, however, 
were preserved by their mothers.” 

Those who are curious to know the subsequent history of the 
Kshatriyas might be interested in the following extract from the 
Adiparvan. 

“ 1 2 Having one and twenty time swept away all the Kshatriyas 
from the earth, the son of Jamadagni engaged in austerities on 
Mahendra the most excellent of mountains. After he had cleared the 
world of Kshatriyas, their widows came to the Brahmans, praying 
for offspring. The religious Brahmans, free from any impulse of 
lust cohabited at the proper seasons with these women, who in 
consequence became pregnant, and brought forth valiant Kshatriya 
boys and girls, to continue the Kshatriya stock. Thus was the 
Kshatriya race virtuously begotten by Brahmans on Kshatriya 

1 Muir Vol. I, pp. 454-455. 

2 Muir Vol. I, pp. 451-452. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


413 


BRAHMINS VERSUS KSHATRIYAS 413 

women, and became multiplied and long-lived, thence arose four castes 

inferior to the Brahmans.” 

These instances of enmity were accompanied by challenges from one 
side to the other which shows how high were the tempers running on 
both sides. The conduct of king Nimi in yoking the Brahmins to his 
chariot and making them drag it like horses show how determined the 
Kshatriyas were to humiliate the Brahmans. The challenges uttered by 
Arjuna Kartavirya against the Brahmins indicates his determination 
to level them down. The Brahmins on their side were not slow to take 
up this challenge and send counter challenges to the kshatriyas not 
to provoke the Brahmins. This is very clear from the way Vayu the 
messenger or Ambassador of the Brahmins talks to Arjuna Kartivirya 
after he had issued his challenge to the Brahmans. Vayu tells Arjuna 
how the Brhmans Atri made sea water saltish by urinating in it, how 
Dandakas were overthrown by the Brahmans, how the Kshatriyas of the 
Talajaughas were destroyed by a single Brahmin Aurva; The striking 
power of the Brahmins is not only superior to that of the Kshatriya it 
is superior to that of the Devas and Vayu proceeds to tell Arjuna some 
of the victories achieved by the Brahmins over the Devas. He tells him 
how Varuna ran away with Bhadra the daughter of Soma and the wife 
of the Brahman Utathya of the race of Angiras how Utathya by his 
curse caused the earth to be dried up and how Varuna as a consequence 
submitted to Utathya and returned his wife. He tells him how once the 
Devas were conquered by the Asuras and the Danavas, how deprived of 
all oblations, and stripped of their dignity they came to the earth went to 
the Brahmin Agastya and applied to him for protection and how Agastya 
scorched the Danavas from heaven and earth and made him fly to the 
South and reinstated the Devas in their dominion. He tells Arjuna how 
once the Adityas were performing a sacrifice and while engaged in it 
were attached by Danavas called Khalims, who came in ten in thousands 
to slay them, how the Adityas went to Indra and how Indra himself 
attached by the Daityas not being able to render help to the Adityas went 
to the Brahmin Vashishtha for help and how Vashishtha taking mercy 
on the Adityas saved them by burning the Danavas alive. He next tells 
Arjuna how the Danavas once fought with the Devas, how by enveloping 
them in dreadful darkness the Danavas slaughtered the Devas, how the 
Devas implored the Brahmin Atri to become the moon and dispell the 
glown around the sun which Atri did thereby saved the Devas from the 
Danvas. The last episode of Brahmin prowess which Vayu tells Arjuna 
is how the Brahmin Chyavana compelled Indra to admit the Ashwins 
to equal rank and drink Soma with them as a token of equality and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


414 


414 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

how when Indra refused he took away both the earth and heaven from 
them and how he created a Demon Mada and put the Devas including 
Indra into his mouth and how he compelled Indra to admit the Ashwins 
to equal rank and drink Soma with them and how Indra ultimately 
surrendered to Chyavana. 

Vayu did not merely recount these exploits of the Brahmins. He did 
something more. Every time he gave Arjuna an instance of the power 
of the Brahmins he ended by asking Arjuna pointed questions such as 
“Can you tell me of any Kshatriya who was superior to him (i.e. the 
Brahmins hero of the story)”. “Declare on your part, any Kshatriya who 
has been superior to him, “Tell me of any Kshatriya superior to Atri.” 

This class war between the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas must have 
gone on for ages. In the light of this the attitude of Manu towards this 
Class War comes as very strange. Consider the following verses from 
the Manu Smriti: 

IV. 135. “Let him who desires prosperity, indeed, never despise a 
Kshatriya, a snake, and a learned Brahmana, be they ever so feeble.” 

IV. 136. “Because these three, when treated with disrespect, may 
utterly destroy him; hence a wise man must never despite them.” 

X. 322. “Kshatriyas prosper not without Brahmans, Brahmans prosper 
not without Kshatriyas; Brahmans and Kshatriyas, being closely united, 
prosper in this (world) and in the next.” 

Here there is a clear attempt on the part of Manu to close the ranks. 
Against whom did Manu want the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas to 
close their ranks? Was this an attempt to forget and forgive or was the 
motive to combine them in a conspiracy to achieve some unholy purpose. 
What were the circumstances that forced Manu to advise the Brahmins 
to forget their age old enmity with Kshatriyas and seek the helping 
hand? The circumstances, must have been very hard and very pressing. 
For there was no room left for a reapproachment between the two. The 
Brahmins had hurled a terrible insult against the Kshatriyas and had 
wounded their price by saying quite openly that the Kshatriyas were 
the illegitimate children of Brahmins begotten by them on Kshatriyas 
widows. The next offensive thing that the Brahmins had done to wound 
the feelings of the Kshatriyas was to extract from the latter a confession 
that the Brahmins were superior to the Kshatriyas in military prowess 
and had made Bhishma say: 

“'The prowess of the Brahmans can destroy even the gods. 
Those wise beings behold all these worlds. To them it is indifferent 
whether they are perfumed with sandal wood or deformed with mire, 


1 Muir Vol. I, pp. 473-474. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


415 


BRAHMINS VERSUS KSHATRIYAS 415 

whether they eat or fast, whether they are clad in silk, or in sack cloth 
or skins. They can turn what is not divine into what is divine, and the 
converse; and can in their anger create other worlds with their guardians. 
They are the gods of the gods; and the cause of the cause. The ignorant 
Brahman is a god, whilst a learned Brahman is yet more a god, like 
the full ocean.” 

All this makes this sudden climb down by the Brahmins, this stoping 
down to win over the Kshatriyas very mysterious. What can be the key 
to this mystery? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


416 


CHAPTER 16 

Shudras and the Counter Revolution 

This is a 21-page foolscap typed manuscript. The cover page 
is having a title ‘Shudras and the Counter-Revolution’ and the 
text on next page starts with the same title. All these pages 
were loose and tagged together. Unfortunately, only 21 pages 
are available and the latter pages seem to be lost. — Editors. 

The laws of Manu relating to the Status of the Shudra make a very 
interesting reading for the simple reason that they have moulded thed 
psychology of the Hindus and determined their attitude towards the 
Shudras who forms at the present and at all times the most numerous 
part of Hindu society. They are set out below under separate heads so 
that it may be possible for the reader to have a complete idea of the 
status given by Manu to the Community of Shudras. 

Manu asks the householders of the Brahmana, Kshatriya and Vaishya 
Class: 

IV. 61. Let him not dwell in a country where the rulers are Shudra. 

A Shudra is not to be deemed as a respectable person. For Manu enacts 
that: 

XI. 24. A Brahmin shall never beg from a Shudra property for 
(performing) a sacrifice i.e. for religious purpose. All marriage ties with 
the Shudra were proscribed. Marriage with a woman belonging to any 
of the three other classes was forbidden. A Shudra was not to have any 
connection with a woman of the higher classes and an act of adultery 
committed by a Shudra with her was declared by manu to be an offence 
involving capital punishment. 

VIII. 374. A Shudra who has an intercourse with a woman of the 
higher caste guarded 1 or unguarded, shall be punished in the following 
manner: 

If she was unguarded, he loses the offending part. If she was guarded 
then he should be put to death and his property confiscated. 

As to office Manu prescribes. 


Guarded means under the protection of some relation. Unguarded means living alone. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


417 


SHUDRAS AND THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION 417 

VIII. 20. A Brahmana who is only a Brahmana by decent i.e. one 
who has neither studied nor performed any other act required by the 
Vedas may, at the king’s pleasure, interpret the law to him i.e. act as 
the Judge, but never a Shudra (however learned he may be). 

VIII. 21. The kingdom of that monarch who looks on while a Shudra 
settles the law will sink low like a cow in a morass. 

VIII. 272. If a Shudra arrogantly presumes to preach religion to 
Brahmins the King shall have poured burning oil in his mouth and oars. 

In the matter of acquiring learning the knowledge Manu ordains as 
follows: 

III. 156. He who instructs Shudra pupils and he whose teacher is a 
Shudra shall become disqualified for being invited to a Shudra. 

IV. 99. He must never read the Vedas.... in the presence of the Shudras. 

Manu’s successors went much beyond him in the cruelty of their 
punishment of the Shudra for studying the Veda. For instance Katyayana 
lays down that if a Shudra overheard the Veda or ventured to utter a 
word of the Veda the King shall cut his tongue in twain and pour hot 
molten lead in his ears. 

As to right to property by the Shudra Manu enjoins as follows: 

X. 129. No superfluous collection of wealth must be made by a Shudra, 
even though he has power to make it, since a servile man, who has 
amassed riches, becomes proud, and, by his insolence or neglect, gives 
pain to Brahmans. 

VIII. 417. A Brahmanas may seize without hesitation if he be in 
distress for his subsistence, the goods of his Shudra. 

The Shudra can have only one occupation. This is one of the inexhorable 
Laws of Manu. Says Manu: 

I. 91. One occupation only, the Lord prescribed to the Shudra, to 
serve meekly these other three castes (namely Brahmin, Kshatriya and 
Vaishyas). 

X. 121. If a Shudra, (unable to subsist by serving Brahmans) seeks 
a livelihood, he may serve Kshatriyas, or he may also seek to maintain 
himself by attending on a wealthy Vaisya. 

X. 122. But let (Shudra) serve Brahmans, either for the sake of heaven, 
or with a view to both (this life and the next); for he who is called the 
servant of a Brahmana thereby gains all his ends. 

X. 123. The service of Brahmanas alone is declared (to be) an excellent 
occupation for a Shudra for whatever else besides this he may perform 
will bear him no fruit. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


418 


418 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Service by Shudra is not left by Manu to be regulated as a free contract. 
If the Shudra refuses to serve there is a provision for conscription which 
runs as follows: 

VIII. 413. A Brahmana may compel a Shudra, whether bought or 
unbought to do servile work; for he is created by the creator to be the 
slave of a Brahmana. 

X. 124. They must allot to him out of their own family (property) a 
suitable maintenance, after considering his ability, his industry, and the 
number of those whom he is bound to suport. 

X. 125. The remnants of their food must be given to him, as well as 
their old household furniture. 

A Shudra is required by Manu to be servile in his speech and manner 
towards the other classes. 

VIII. 270. A Shudra who insults a twice-born man with gross invective, 
shall have his tongue cut out; for he is of low origin. 

VIII. 271. If he mentions the names and castes of the (twice-born) 
with contumely, an iron nail, ten fingers long, shall be thrust red hot 
into his mouth. 

Manu is not satisfied with this. He wants this servile status of the 
Shudra to be expressed in the names and surnames of persons belonging 
to that community. Manu says: 

II. 31. Let the first part of a Brahman’s name denote something 
auspicious, a Kshatriya’s be connected with power and a Vaishya’s with 
wealth, but a Shudra’s, express something contemptible. 

II. 32. The second part of a Brahman’s name shall be a word implying 
happiness; of a Kshatriya’s word implying protection; of a Vaishya’s a term 
expressive of thriving and of a Shudra’s an expression denoting services. 

What was the position of the Shudra before Manu? Manu treats the 
Shudra as though he was an alien Non- Aryan not entitled to the social 
and religious privileges of the Aryan. Unfortunately the view that the 
Shudra was a Non- Aryan is too readily accepted by the generality of the 
people. But there can be no doubt that this view has not the slightest 
foundation in the literature of the ancient Aryans. 

Reading the Religious literature of the ancient Aryans one comes 
across the names of various communities and groups of people. There 
were first of all the Aryans with their fourfold divisions of Brahmins, 
Kshatriyas, Vaishyas and Shudras. Besides them and apart from them 
there were (i) Asuras (ii) Suras or Devas (iii) Yakshas (iv) Gandharvas 
(v) Kinnars (vi) Charanas (vii) Ashvins and (viii) Nishadas. The Nishadas 
were a jungle people primitive and uncivilized. The Gandharvas, 
Yakshas, Kinnars, Charanas and Ashvins were professional classes and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


419 


SHUDRAS AND THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION 419 

not communities. The word Asura is generic name given to various tribes 
known by their tribal names of Daityas, Danavas, Dasyus, Kalananjas, 
Kaleyyas, Kalins, Nagas, Nivata-Kavachas, Paulomas, Pishachas and 
Raxasas. We do not know if the Suras and Devas were composed of 
various tribes as the Asuras were. We only know the leaders of the 
Deva Community. The well known amongst them were Brahma, Vishnu 
Rudra, Surya, Indra, Varuna, Soma etc. 

Due mostly to the ignorant interpretations of Sayanacharya some very 
curious beliefs prevail even among the best informed people about these 
communities namely the Aryans, the Asuras and the Devas and their 
inter-relation and their consanguinity. It is believed that the Asuras were 
not a human species at all. They are held to have been ghosts and goblins 
who plagued the Aryans with their nocturnal visitations. The Suras or 
Devas are understood to be poetic deifications of nature’s forces. With 
regard to the Aryans the belief is that they were a fair race with sharp 
nose and had a great deal of colour prejudice. As to the Dasyus it is 
asserted that a Dasyu is only another name for a Shudra. The Shudras 
it is said formed the aboriginals of India. They were dark and flat nosed. 
The Aryans who invaded India conquered them and made them slaves 
and as a badge of slavery gave them the name Dasyu which it is said 
comes from the word Das 1 which means a slave. 

Every one of these beliefs is unfounded. The Asuras and Suras were 
communities of human beings as the Aryans were. The Asuras and Suras 
were descended from a common father Kashapa. The story is that Daksha 
Prajapati had 60 daughters, of them thirteen were given in marriage 
to Kashapa. Diti and Aditi were two among the 13 of Kashapa’s wives. 
Those born to Diti were called Asuras and those born to Aditi were 
called Suras or Devas. The two faught a long and a bloody battle for 
the soverignty of the world. This no doubt is mythology and mythology 
though it is history in hyperbole is still history. 

The Aryans were not a race. The Aryans were a collection of people. 
The cement that held them together was their interest in the maintenance 
of a type of culture called Aryan culture. Any one who accepted the 
Aryan culture was an Aryan. Not being a race there was no fixed type 
of colour and physiognomy which could be called Aryan. There was no 
dark and flat nose people for the Aryans to distinguish themselves from 2 . 
The whole of this edifice of colour prejudice as being factors for division 
and antagonism between Aryans and the Dasyus is based upon a wrong 
meaning given to the two words Varna and Anas which are used with 
reference to the Dasyus. The word Varna is taken to mean colour and the 

1 According to Nirukta, Das means to destroy. 

2 On the whole of this subject see a brilliant discussion by Mr. Satvalekar in Purusharth 
Vol. XIII. p. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


420 


420 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

word Anas is taken to mean without nose. Both these meanings are 
erroneous. Varna means Caste or group and Anas if read as An-As 
means uncultivated speech. That statement that the Aryans had a colour 
prejudice which determined their social order is arrant nonsense. If there 
were any people who were devoid of colour prejudice it is the Aryans and 
that is because there was no dominant colour to distinguish themselves. 

It is wrong to say that the Dasyus were non-Aryans by race. The 
Dasyus were not a pre-Aryan race of aboriginals of India. The Dasyus 
were members of the Aryan community who were deprived of the title 
of Arya for opposing some belief or cult which was an essential part of 
the Aryan Culture. How this belief that the Dasyus were Non-Aryans 
by race could have arisen it is difficult to understand. In the Rig Veda 
(X. 49) Indra says: “I (Indra) have killed with my thuderbolt for the 
good of the man, known as Kavi. I have protected Kupa by adopting 
means of protection. I took up the thunderbolt for killing Susna. I have 
deprived the Dasyus of the appellation of Arya. ” 

Nothing can be more positive and definite than this statement of Indra 
that the Dasyus were Aryans. Further and better proof of this fact can 
be had in the impeachment of Indra for the various atrocities he had 
committed. In the list of atrocities for which Indra was impeached there 
was one charge namely the killing of Vratra. Vratra was the leader of 
the Dasyus. It is unthinkable that such a charge could be framed against 
Indra if the Dasyus were not Aryans. 

It is erroneous to believe that the Shudras were conquered by the Aryan 
invaders. In the first place the story that the Aryans came from outside 
India and invaded the natives has no evidence to support it. There is a 
large body of evidence that India is the home of the Aryans. In the second 
place there is no evidence anywhere of any warfare having taken place 
between Aryans and Dasyus but the Dasyus have nothing to do with the 
Shudras. In the third place it is difficult to believe that the Aryans were 
a powerful people capable of much military prowess. Any one who reads 
the history of the Aryans in India in their relation to the Devas will be 
reminded of the relationship that subsisted between the Viellens and their 
lords during the feudal times. The Devas were the feudal lords and the 
Aryans were the Villens. The innumerable sacrifices which the Aryans 
performed have the look of fudal dues paid to the Deva. This servility of 
the Aryans to the Devas was due to the fact that without the help and the 
protection of the Devas they could not withstand the assualts of the Asuras. 
It is too much to presume that so effete a people could have conquered 
the Shudras. Lastly there was no necessity to conquer the Shudra. 
They were Aryans in the only sense in which the word Aryan is used, 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


421 


SHUDRAS AND THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION 421 

namely, the upholders of the Aryans Culture. Two things are clear about 
the Shudras. Nobody has ever contended that they were dark and flat 
nosed. Nobody has contended that they were defeated or enslaved by 
the Aryans. It is wrong to treat the Dasyus and Shudras as one and 
the same. As a people they may be the same. But culturally they were 
quite different. The Dasyus were Non-Aryans in the sense they had 
fallen away and rebelled against the Aryan culture. The Shudras on 
the other hand were Aryans i.e. they were believers in the Aryan way 
of life. The Shudra was accepted as an Aryan and as late as Kautilya’s 
Artha Shastra was addressed an Arya. 

The Shudra was an intergral, natural and valued member of the Aryan 
Society is proved by a prayer which is found in the Yajur Veda^nd 
which is offered by the Sacrificer. It runs as follows: 

“ O Gods 

Give lustre to our holy priests, set lustre in our ruling chiefs, Lustre 
to Vaisyas, Shudras: Give, through lustre; Lustre unto me.” It is a 
remarkable prayer, remarkable because it shows that the Shudra was a 
member of the Aryan Community and was also a respected member of it. 

That the Shudras were invited to be present at the coronation of the 
King along with Brahmins, Kshatriyas and Vaishyas is proved by the 
description given in the Mahabharata of the coronation of Yudhisthira 
the eldest brother of the Pandavas. Shudra took part in the consecration 
of the King. According to ancient writer called Nilkantha speaking of 
the coronation ceremony expressly says: “that the four chief Ministers, 
Brahmin, Kshatriya, Vaishya and Shudra consecrated the new king. Then 
the leaders of each Varna and by the Castes lower still consecrated him 
with the holy water. Then followed acclamation by the twice-born. In the 
post-vedic period preceding Manu there was group of the representatives 
of the people called the Ratnis. The Ratnis played a significant part in 
the investiture of the King. The Ratnis were so called because they held 
the Ratna (jewel) which was a symbol of sovereignty. The king received 
his sovereignty only when the Ratnis handed over to him the jewel of 
sovereignty and on receiving his sovereignty the King went to the house 
of each of the Ratnis and made an offering to him. It is a significant 
fact that the Shudra was one of the Ratnis. 

Shudras were members of the two political Assemblies of ancient 
times namely the Janapada and Paura and as a member of this he was 
entitled to special respect even from a Brahmin. 


White Yajur Veda p. 200. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


422 


422 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

That the Shudra in the Ancient Aryan Society had reached a high 
political status is indisputable. They could become ministers of State. The 
Mahabharata bears testimony to this. Enumerating the different classes 
of ministers within his memory the writer of the Mahabharata mentions 
a list 1 of 37 Ministers of whom four are Brahmins, eight Kshatriyas, 
twenty-one Vaishyas, three Shudras and one Suta. 

Shudras did not stop with being ministers of State. They even became 
Kings. The story of Shudras which is given in the Rig Veda stands in 
cruel contrast with the views expressed by Manu regarding the eligibility 
of the Shudra to be a King. The reign of Sudas if referred to at all is 
referred only in connection with the terrible contest between Vashishtha 
and Vishvamitra as to who should become the purohit or Royal priest 
of King Sudas. The issue involved in the contest was as to the right to 
officiate as the Purohit or the King. Vashishtha who was a Brahmin and 
who was already an officiating priest of Sudas claimed that a Brahmin 
alone could become the Purohit of a King while Vishvamitra who was 
a Kshatriya contended that a Kshatriya was competent for that office. 
Vishvamitra succeeded and in his turn became the Purohit of Sudas. 
The contest is indeed memorable because the issue involved in it is 
very crucial although the result has not been a permanent deprivation 
of the Brahmins. But there can be no doubt the story is probably the 
best piece of social history that is to be found in the ancient literature. 
Unfortunately nobody has taken serious notice of it. Nobody has even 
asked who this King was. Sudas was the son of Paijavana and Paijavana 
is the son of Devodas who was the King of Kasi i.e. Benares. What was 
the Varna of Sudas? Few would believe if they were told that King Sudas 
was a Shudra. But that is a fact and it can be proved by the testimony 
of the Mahabharata 2 where in the Santipurva a reference is made to this 
Paijavana. It is stated that Paijavana was a Shudra. In the light of this 
the story of Sudas sheds new light on the status of the Shudra in the 
Aryan Society. It shows that a Shudra could be a reigning monarch. It 
also shows that both the Brahmins and the Kshatriyas not only saw no 
humiliation in serving a Shudra King but they with each other to secure 
his patronage and were ready to perform vedic ceremonies at his house. 

It cannot be said that there were no Shudra Kings in later times. 
On the contrary history shows that the two dynasties which preceded 
Manu were dynasties of Shudras Kings. The Nandas who ruled from 
B.C.413 to B.C. 322* were Shudras. The mauryas who succeded 

1 Jaiswal — Hindu Polity Part II. p. 148. 

2 Muir Sanskrit Texts Vol. I. p. 366. 

* Figures are incorporated by Editors as they are not in the M.S. — Editors. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


423 


SHUDRAS AND THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION 423 

the Nandas and who ruled from 322 3.C, to 183 B.C.* were also Shudras. 
What more glaring piece of evidence can there be to show the high 
dignity enjoyed by the Shudra than to point to the case of Asoka who 
was not merely the Emperor of India but a Shudra and his Empire was 
the Empire built by the Shudras. 

On the question of the right of the Shudra to study the Vedas a 
reference may be made to the Chhandogya Upanished (V. 1.2). It 
relates the story of one Janasruti to whom Veda Vidya was taught by 
the preceptor Raikva. This Janasruti was a Shudra. This story if it is 
a genuine story leaves no doubt that there was a time when there was 
no bar against the Shudra in the matter of studying the Vedas. 

Not only was Shudra free to study the Vedas but there were Shudras 
who had reached the status of Rishis and has been composers of the 
Hymns of the Vedas. The story of the Rishi Kavasha Aliusha 1 is very 
illuminating. He was a Rishi and the author of several hymns of the 
Tenth Book of the Rig-Veda. 2 

On the question of the spiritual eligibility of the Shudra to perform 
the Vedic ceremonies and sacrifies the following data may be presented. 
Jaimini 3 the author of the Purva Mimansa mentions an ancient teacher 
by name Badari — whose work is lost as an exponent of the view that 
even Shudra could perform Vedic sacrifices. The Bharadvaja Srauta 
Sutra (v. 28) admits that there exists another school of thought which 
holds that a Sudra can consecrate the three sacred fires necessary for 
the performance of a Vedic Sacrifice. Similarly the Commentator of the 
Katyayana Srauta Sutra (1 & 5) admits that there are certain Vedic texts 
which lead to the inference that the Shudra was eligible to perform Vedic 
rites. In the Satpath Brahmana (I. 1.4.12) there is enunciated a rule of 
etiquette which the priest officiating at the performance of a sacrifice 
is required to observe. It relates to the mode in which the priest should 
address the Haviskut (the person celebrating the sacrifice) calling upon 
him to begin the ceremony. The rule says: 

“Now there are four different forms of this call, viz. ‘Come hither’ 
(Ehi) in the case of a Brahmana; ‘approach’ (Agahi) and ‘hasten hither’ 
(Adarva) in the case of a Vaishya and a member of the Military caste 
and ‘run hither’ (Adhava) in that of a Shudra.” 

In the Satpatha Brahman 4 there is evidence to show that the Shudra 
was eligible to perform the Soma Yaga and to partake of the divine 
drink Soma. It says that in the Soma Yaga in place of a ‘payovrata’ 

1 Aitercya Brahmana Vol. II. p. 112. 

2 Max-Muller — Ancient Sanskrit Literature 1860, p.58. 

3 See Kane — History of Dharmashastras. 

4 Quoted by Kane — History of Dharmashastras. 

5 Figures are incorporated by Editors as they are not in the MS. — Editors. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


424 


424 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

(vow to drink milk only) Mastu (whey) is prescribed for the Shudra. In 
another place the same Satapatha Brahmana 1 says: 

“There are four classes, the Brahmin, Rajanya, Vaishya and Sudra. 
There is no one of these who dislikes Soma. If any one of them however 
should do so, let there be an atonment.” 

This means that the drinking of Soma was not only permissible but 
it was compulsory on all including the Shudra. But in the story of the 
Ashvins there is definite evidence that the Shudra had a right to the 
divine drink of Soma. The Ashvins as the story 2 goes once happened to 
behold Sukanya when she had just bathed and when her person was bare. 
She was young girl married to a Rishi by name Chyavana who at the 
time of marriage was so old as to be dying almost any day. The Ashvins 
were captivated by the beauty of Sukanya and said “accept one of us 
for your husband, it behoveth thee not to spend thy youth fruitlessly.” 

She refused saying “I am devoted to my husband.” They again spoke 
to her and this time proposed a bargain — “We two are the celestial 
physicians of note. We will make thy husband young and graceful. Do 
thou then select one of us as thy husband.” She went to her husband 
and communicated to him the terms of the bargain. Chyavana said to 
Sukanya “Do thou so” and the bargain was carried out and Chyavana 
was made a young man by the Ashwins. Subsequently a question arose 
whether the Ashwins were entitled to Soma which was the drink of 
the Gods. Indra objected saying that the Ashwins were Shudras and 
therefore not entitled to Soma. Chyavana who had received perpetual 
youth from the Ashwins set aside the contention and compelled Indra 
to give them Soma. 

All these provisions can have no meaning unless the Shudra was 
in fact performing the Vedic ceremonies to which they relate — there is 
evidence to show that a Shudra woman took part in the Vedic sacrifice 
known as the Ashwamedha . 3 

With regard to the Upanayana ceremony and the right to wear the 
sacred thread there is nowhere an express prohibition against the Shudra. 
On the other hand in the Sansakara Ganapati there is an express 
provision declaring the Shudra to be eligible for Upanayan . 4 

The Shudra though belonging to a lower class was nonetheless a free 
citizen in days before Manu cannot be gainsaid. Consider the following 
provisions in Kautilya’s Artha Shastra: 

1 Quoted by Muir Sanskrit Texts I p. 367. 

2 V. Fausboil Indian Mythology pp. 128-134. 

3 Jaiswal Indian Polity Part II. p. 17. 

4 Referred to by Max-Muller in Ancient Sanskrit Literature-(1860) — p. 207. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


425 


SHUDRAS AND THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION 425 

“The selling or mortgaging by kinsmen of the life of a Sudra who 
is not a born slave, and has not attained majority, but is an Arya in 
birth shall be punished with a fine of 2 panas.” 

“Deceiving a slave of his money or depriving him of the privileges 
he can exercise as an Arya (Aryabhava), shall be punished with half 
the fine (levied for enslaving the life of an Arya).” 

“Failure to set a slave at liberty on the receipt of a required amount 
of ransom shall be punished with a fine of 12 panas; putting a slave 
under confinement for no reason (samrodhaschakaranat) shall likewise 
be punished. 

“The offspring of a man who has sold himself off as a slave shall 
be an Arya. A slave shall be entitled without prejudice to his master’s 
work but also the inheritance he has received from his father.” 

Why did Manu suppress the Shudra? 

This riddle of the Shudra is not a simple riddle. It is a complex one. 
The Aryans were for ever attempting to Aryanize the Non-Aryans i.e. 
bringing them within the pale of the Aryan Culture. So keen were the 
Aryans on Aryanization that they had developed a religious ceremony 
for the mass conversion of the Non- Aryans. The ceremony was called 
Vratya-stoma. Speaking of the Vratya-Stoma Mahamahopadhyaya 
Haraprasad Shastri says: 

“The ceremony by which these Vratyas were purified, and which is 
described in the Pancavimsa Brahmana differed at least in one particular 
from other great ceremonies of the Vedic times, namely, while other 
ceremonies had only one sacrificer and his wife in the hall of sacrifice, 
this ceremony had thousands of sacrificers. One of them, the wisest, the 
richest or the most powerful acted as Grahapati or Patriarch and the 
rest simply followed him. The Grahapati had to pay a higher Daksina 
or fee than the rest.” 

“I consider this to be a device by which thousands and thousands of 
Vratyas were admitted to the society of the Rsis by one ceremony, and 
such ceremonies were of frequent occurrence, thus admitting hordes 
after hordes of nomadic Aryans into settled habits. The purified Vratyas 
were not allowed to bring their possessions in Vratya life with them 
in settled life. They had to leave them to those who remained Vratyas 
still or do the so-called Brahmins of the Magadha-desa, which, as I 
have elsewhere shown, was mostly inhabited by men whom the Rsis 
looked down upon.” 

“But when the Vratyas were admitted to settled life, they were 
admitted as fully equals. The Rsis used to eat food cooked by them, 
and they used to eat food cooked by the Rsis. They were taught all 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


426 


426 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

the three Vidyas, Sama, Rk, and Yajus, and they were allowed to 
study the Vedas, and teach them, and to sacrifice for themselves and 
for others, that is, they were considered as fully equal. Not only were 
they treated as fully equal but they attained the highest proficiency 
of a Rsi. Samans were revealed to them, and even Rks. One of the 
purified Vratyas, Kausitaki was allowed to collect Brahmans of the 
Rig-Veda, which collection still goes under his name.” 

The Aryans were not only converting to their way of life the willing 
non-Aryans they were also attempting to make converts from among 
the unwilling Asuras who were opposed to the Aryans, their cult of 
sacrifice, their theory of Chaturvarna and even to their Vedas which 
according to the mythology the Asuras stole away from the Aryas. 
The story of Vishnu rescuing Pralhad by killing his father the Asura 
called Hiranya Kashapu on the ground that Pralhad was willing to be 
converted to the Aryan Culture while Hiranya Kashapu was opposed 
to it is an illustration in point. Here are instances of Non-Aryans 
being naturalized and enfranchized. Why was an opposite attitude 
taken against the Shudra? Why was the Shudra fully naturalized and 
fully enfranchized, denaturalized and disfranchized? 

The treatment given to the Nishadas gives a point to this riddle 
which should not be overlooked. The Ancient Sanskrit Literature is 
full of reference to the five tribes. They are described under various 
appellations 1 such as Panch-Krishtayah, Panch-Kshitayah, Panch- 
Kshityas Manushyah, Panch-Charshanayah, Panch-Janah, Panchi - 
janya viz., Pancha-Bhuma, Panchajata. There is a difference of opinion 
as to what these terms denote. Sayanacharya the Commentator of 
Rig Veda says that these expressions refer to the four Varnas and 
the Nishads. The Vishnu Purana gives the following story about the 
Nishads: 

“7. The Maiden named Sunitha, who was the first born of Mrityu 
(Death) was given as wife to Anga; and of her Vena was born.” 

8. This son of Mrityu’s daughter, infected with the taint of his 
maternal grandfather, was born corrupt, as if by nature. 

9. When Vena was inaugurated as king by the eminent rishis, he 
caused this proclamation to be made on the earth; “Men must not 
sacrifice, or give gifts, or present oblations. Who else but myself is 
the enjoyer of sacrifices? I am for ever the lord of offerings.” 

10. Then all the rishis approaching the king with respectful 
salutations, said to him in a gentle and conciliatory tone: 


Source not quoted. — Editors. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


427 


SHUDRAS AND THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION 427 

11. ‘Hear, O King, what we have to say: 

12. We shall worship Hari, the monarch of the Gods, and the lord 
of all sacrifices with a Dirghasattra (prolonged sacrifice), from which 
the highest benefits will accrue to your kingdom, your person and 
your subjects. May blessing rest upon you? You shall have a share 
in the ceremony. 

13. Vishnu the Lord of sacrifices Male, being propitiated by us with 
this rite, will grant all the objects of your desire. Hari, the Lord of 
Sacrifices, bestows on those kings in whose country he is honoured 
with oblation everything that they wish.” Vena replied: “What other 
being is superior to me? Who else but I should be adored ? Who is 
this person called Hari, whom you regard as the Lord of sacrifice? 
Brahma Janardana, Rudra, Indra, Vayu, Yama, Ravi (the Sun) Agni, 
Varuna, Dhatri, Pushan, Earth, the Moon, — these and the other 
gods who curse and bless are all present in king’s person: for he is 
composed of all the gods. Knowing this, ye must act in conformity 
with my commands. Brahmans, ye must neither give gifts, nor present 
oblations nor sacrifices. 

14. As obedience to their husbands is esteemed the highest duty of 
women, so is the observance of my orders incumbent upon you.” The 
Rishis answered. ‘Give permission great kings: let not religion perish: 
this whole world is but a modified form of oblations. 

15. When religion perishes the whole world is destroyed with it. 
When Vena although thus admonished and repeatedly addressed by 
the eminent rishis, did not give his permission, then all the munis, 
filled with wrath and indignation, cried out to one another, “Slay, 
slay the sinner.” 

16. This man of degraded life, who blasphemes the sacrified Male, 
the god, the Lord without beginning or end, is not fit to be lord of the 
earth.’ So saying the munis smote with blades of kusa grass consecrated 
by texts this king who had been already smitten by his blasphemy of 
the divine being and his other offences. The munis afterwards beheld 
dust all round, and asked the people who were standing near what 
that was. 

17. They were informed: “In this country which has no king, the 
people being distressed, have become robbers, and have begun to seize 
the property of others. 

18. It is from these robbers rushing impetuously, and plundering 
other men’s goods, that this great dust is seen ?” Then all the 
munis, consulting together, rubbed with force the thigh of the king, 
who was childless, in order to produce a son. From his thigh when 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


428 


428 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

rubbed there was produced a man like a charred log, with flat face, 
and extremely short. 

19. “What shall I do,” cried the man, in distress, to the Brahmans. They 
said to him, “Sit down (nishida); and from this he became a Nishada. 

20. From his sprang the Nishadas dwelling in the Vindhya mountains, 
distinguished by their wicked deeds. 

21. By this means the sin of the king departed out of him; and so 
were the Nishads produced, the offspring of the wickedness of Vena.” 

This is a mythological origin of the Nishads. But it contains historical 
facts. It proves that the Nishads were a low, primitive jungle tribe 
living in the forests of the Vindhya mountains, that they were a wicked 
people i.e. opposed to the Aryan Culture. They invented a mythology for 
explaining their origin and connecting them with the Aryan Society. All 
this was done in order to support the inclusion of the Nishads into the 
Aryan fold though not in the Aryan Society. Now there is nowhere any 
sort of disabilities imposed upon Nishads a low, uncivilized and foreign 
tribe. Question is why were the disabilities imposed upon the Shudra, 
who was civilized and an Arya? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


429 


CHAPTER 17 

The Woman and the Counter- 
Revolution 

There is one copy with a title ‘The Woman and the Counter- 
Revolution’. There is another copy of the same text with a title, 
‘The Riddle of the Woman’. The Editorial Board felt that this 
essay would be appropriate in this Volume rather than in the 
volume of ‘Riddles in Hinduism’ . — Editors. 

Manu can hardly be said to be more tender to women than he was 
to the Shudra. He starts with a low opinion of women. Manu proclaims: 

II. 213. It is the nature of women to seduce men in this (world); for 
that reason the wise are never unguarded in (the company of) females. 

II. 214. For women are able to lead astray in (this) world not only 
a fool, but even a learned man, and (to make) him a slave of desire 
and anger. 

II. 215. One should not sit in a lonely place with one’s mother, sister 
or daughter; for the senses are powerful, and master even a learned man. 

IX. 14. Women do not care for beauty, nor is their attention fixed on 
age; (thinking); ‘(It is enough that) he is a man’, they give themselves 
to the handsome and to the ugly. 

IX. 15. Through their passion for men, through their mutable temper, 
through their natural heartlessness, they become disloyal towards their 
husbands, however, carefully they may be guarded in this (world). 

IX. 16. Knowing their disposition, which the Lord of creatures laid in 
them at the creation, to be such, (every) man should most strenuously 
exert himself to guard them. 

IX. 17. (When creating them) Manu allotted to women (a love of their) 
bed, (of their) seat and (of) ornament, impure desires, wrath, dishonesty, 
malice, and bad conduct. 

The laws of Manu against women are of a piece with this view. Women 
are not to be free under any circumstances. In the opinion of Manu: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


430 


430 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


IX. 2. Day and night women must be kept in dependence by the males 
(of their families), and, if they attach themselves to sexual enjoyments, 
they must be kept under one’s control. 

IX. 3. Her father protects (her) in childhood, her husband protects 
(her) in youth, and her sons protect (her) in old age; a woman is never 
fit for independence. 

IX. 5. Women must particularly be guarded against evil inclinations, 
however trifling (they may appear); for, if they are not guarded, they 
will bring sorrow on two families. 

IX. 6. Considering that the highest duty of all castes, even weak 
husbands (must) strive to guard their wives. 

IV. 147. By a girl, by a young woman, or even by an aged one, nothing 
must be done independently, even in her own house. 

V. 148. In childhood a female must be subject to her father, in youth 
to her husband, when her lord is dead to her sons; a woman must never 
be independent. 

V. 149. She must not seek to separate herself from her father, 
husband, or sons; by leaving them she would make both (her own and 
her husband’s) families contemptible. 

Woman is not to have a right to divorce. 

IX. 45. The husband is declared to be one with the wife, which means 
that there could be no separation once a woman is married. 

Many Hindus stop here as though this is the whole story regarding 
Manu’s law of divorce and keep on idolizing it by comforting their 
conscience by holding out the view that Manu regarded marriage as 
sacrament and therefore, did not allow divorce. This of course is far 
from the truth. His law against divorce had a very different motive. It 
was not to tie up a man to a woman but it was to tie up the woman to 
a man and to leave the man free. 

For Manu does not prevent a man from giving up his wife. Indeed 
he not only allows him to abandon his wife but he also permits him to 
sell her. But what he does is to prevent the wife from becoming free. 
See what Manu says: 

IX. 46. Neither by sale nor by repudiation is a wife released from 
her husband. 

The meaning is that a wife, sold or repudiated by her husband, can 
never become the legitimate wife of another who may have bought 
or received her after she was repudiated. If this is not monstrous 
nothing can be. But Manu was not worried by consideration of justice 
or injustice of his law. He wanted to deprive woman of the freedom 
she had under the Buddhistic regime. He knew that by her misuse of 
her liberty, by her willingness to marry the Shudra the system of the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


431 


THE WOMAN AND THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION 431 

gradation of the Varna had been destroyed. Manu was outraged by her license 
and in putting a stop to it he deprived her of her liberty. 

A wife was reduced by manu to the level of a slave in the matter of property. 

IX. 416. A wife, a son, and a slave, these three are declared to have no 
property; the wealth which they earn is (acquired) for him to whom they 
belong. 

When she becomes a widow Manu allows her maintenance, if her husband 
was joint, and a widow’s estate in the property of her husband, if he was 
separate from his family. But Manu never allows her to have any dominion 
over property. 

A woman under the laws of Manu is subject to corporal punishment and 
Manu allows the husband the right to beat his wife. 

VIII. 299. A wife, a son, a slave, a pupil and a younger brother of full 
blood, who have committed faults, may be beaten with a rope or a split 
bamboo. In other matters woman was reduced by Manu to the same position 
as the Shudra. 

The study of the Veda was forbidden to her by Manu as it was to 
the Shudra. 

II. 66. Even for a woman the performance of the Sanskaras are necessary 
and they should be performed. But they should be performed without uttering 
the Veda Mantras. 

IX. 18. Women have no right to study the Vedas. That is why their 
Sanskars are performed without Veda Mantras. Women have no knowledge 
of religion because they have no right to know the Vedas. The uttering of 
the Veda Mantras is useful for removing sin. As women cannot utter the 
Veda Mantras they are as unclean as untruth is. 

Offering sacrifices according to Brahmanism formed the very soul of religion. 
Yet Manu will not allow women to perform them. Manu ordains that: 

XI. 36. A woman shall not perform the daily sacrifices prescribed by the 
Vedas. 

XI. 37. If she does it she will go to hell. 

To disable her from performing such sacrifices Manu prevents her from 
getting the aid and services of a Brahmin priest. 

IV. 205. A Brahman must never eat food given at a sacrifice performed 
by a woman. 

IV. 206. Sacrifices performed by women are inauspicious and not acceptable 
to God. They should therefore be avoided. 

Woman was not to have any intellectual persuits nor free will, nor 
freedom of thought. She was not to join any heretical sect such as 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


432 


432 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Buddhism. If she continues to adhere to it till death she is not to be 
given the libation of water as is done in the case of all dead. 

Finally a word regarding the ideal of life, Manu has sought to place 
before a woman. It had better be stated in his own words: 

V. 151. Him to whom her father may give her, or her brother with 
the father’s permission, she shall obey as long as he lives and when he 
is dead, she must not insult his memory. 

V. 154. Though destitute or virtue, or seeking pleasure elsewhere, or 
devoid of good qualities, yet a husband must be constantly worshipped 
as a god by a faithful wife. 

V. 155. No sacrifice, no vow, no fast must be performed by women, 
apart from their husbands; if a wife obeys her husband, she will for 
that reason alone be exalted in heaven. 

Then comes the choicest texts which forms the pith and the marrow 
of this ideal which Manu prescribes for women: 

V. 153. The husband who wedded her with sacred Mantras, is always 
a source of happiness to his wife, both in season and out of season, in 
this world and in the next. 

V. 150. She must always be cheerful, clever in the management of 
her household affairs, careful in cleaning her utensils, and economical 
in expenditure. 

This the Hindus regard as a very lofty ideal for a woman! 

Compare with this the position of the woman before the days of Manu. 

That a woman was entitled to Upanayan is clear from the Atharva Veda 
where a girl is spoken of as being eligible for marriage having finished 
her Brahmacharya. From the Shrauta Sutras it is clear that women 
could repeat the Mantras of the Vedas and that women were taught to 
read the Vedas. Panini’s Ashtaadhyai bears testimony to the fact that 
women attended Gurukul and studied the various Shakhas of the Veda 
and became expert in Mimansa. Patanjali’s Maha Bhashya shows that 
women were teachers and taught Vedas to girl students. The stories 
of women entering into public discussions with men on most abstruse 
subjects of religion, philosophy and metaphysics are by no means few. 
The story of public disputation between Janaka and Sulbha, between 
Yajnavalkya and Gargi, between Yajnavalkya and Maitrei and between 
Shankaracharya and Vidyadhari shows that Indian women in pre-Manu’s 
time could rise to the highest pinnacle of learning and education. 

That women in pre-Manu days were highly respected cannot be 
disputed. Among the Ratnis who played so prominent a part in the 
coronation of the King in Ancient India was the queen and the King 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


433 


THE WOMAN AND THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION 433 

made her an offering 1 as he did to the others. Not only the king elect did 
homage to the Queen, he worshipped his other wives of lower castes 2 . In 
the same way the King offers salutation after the coronation ceremony 
to the, ladies of the chiefs of the shremes (guides 3 ). 

In the days of Kautilya women 4 were deemed to have attained their 
age of majority at 12 and men at 16. The age of majority was in all 
probability the age of marriage. That the marriages were post puberty 
marriages is clear from Baudhayanas’ Grihya Sutras 5 where an expiatory 
ceremony is specially prescribed in the case of a bride passing her menses 
on the occasion of her marriage. 

In Kautilya there is no law as to age of consent. That is because 
marriages were post puberty marriages and Kautilya is more concerned 
with cases in which a bride or a bridegroom is married without disclosing 
the fact of his or her having had sexual intercouse before marriage with 
another person or maiden in menses having had sexual intercouse. In 
the former case Kautilya says 6 : 

“Any person who has given a girl in marriage without announcing 
her guilt of having laid with another shall not only he punished with a 
fine but also be made to return the Sulka and Stridhana. Any person 
receiving a girl in marriage without announcing the blemishes of the 
bridegroom shall not only pay double the above fine, but also forfeit 
the Sulka and Stridhana (he paid for the bride). In regard to the latter 
case the rule in Kautilya 7 is: 

“It is no offence for a man of equal caste and rank to have connection 
with a maiden who has been unmarried three years after her first 
menses. Nor is it an offence for a man, even of different caste, to have 
connection with a maiden who has spent more than three years after 
her first menses and has no jewellery on her person.” 

Unlike Manu Kautilya’s idea is monogamy. Man can marry more than 
one wife only under certain conditions. They are given by Kautilya in 
the following terms 1 : 

“If a woman either brings forth no (live) children, or has no male 
issue, or is barren, her husband shall wait for eight years (before 
marrying another). If she bears only a dead child, he has to wait for 
ten years. If she brings forth only females, he has to wait for twelve 

1 Jaiswal: Indian Polity, Part II, p. 16. 

2 Ibid, Part II, p. 17. 

3 Ibid, p. 82. 

4 Sham Shastri, Kautilya’s Arthashastra, p. 175. 

5 Baudhyayana, I. 7. 22. 

6 Sham Shastri, Kautilya’s Arthashastra, p. 222. 

7 Ibid, p. 259. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


434 


434 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

years. Then if he is desirious to have sons, he may marry another. In 
case of violating this rule, he shll be made to pay her not only Sulks, 
her property (Stridhana) and an adequate monetary compensation 
(adhivedanika martham), but also a fine of 24 panas to the Government. 
Having given the necessary amount of Sulka and property (Stridhana) 
even to those women who have not received such things on the 
occasion of their marriage with him, and also having given his wives 
the proportionate compensation and an adequate subsistence (vrutti), 
he may marry any number of women; for women are created for the 
sake of sons.” 

Unlike Manu in Kautilya’s time women could claim divorce on 
the ground of mutual enmity and hatred. 

“A woman, hating her husband, cannot dissolve her marriage with 
him against his will. Nor can a man dissolve his marriage with his 
wife against her will. But from mutual enmity, divorce may be obtained 
(parasparam dveshanmokshah). If a man, apprehending danger from 
his wife, desires divorce (mokshamichchhet), he shall return to her 
whatever she was given (on the occasion of her marriage). If a woman, 
under the apprehension of danger from her husband, desires divorce, 
she shall forfeit her claim to her property.” 

A wife can abandon her husband if he is a bad character. 

“A woman who has a right to claim maintenance for an unlimited 
period of time shall be given as much food and clothing (grasacchadana) 
as necessary for her, or more than is neessary in proportion to the 
income of the maintainer (yathapurushapari-vapam va). If the period 
(for which such things are to be given to her with one-tenth of the 
amount in addition) is limited, then a certain amount of money, 
fixed in proportion to the income of the maintainer, shall be given 
to her; so also if she has not been given her Sulka, property, and 
compensation (due to her for allowing her husband to re-marry). If she 
places herself under the protection of any one belonging to her father- 
in-law’s family (Svasurakula), or if she begins to live independently, 
then her husband shall not be sued (for her maintenance). Thus the 
determination of maintenance is dealt with.” 

In the days of Kautilya there was no ban on woman or a widow 
remarrying: 

“On the death of her husband a woman, desirous to lead a pious 
life, shall at once receive not only her endowment and jewellery 
(sthapyabharanam), but also the balance of Sulka due to her. If 
after obtaining these two things she re-married another, she shall be 
caused to pay them back together with interest (on their value). If 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


435 


THE WOMAN AND THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION 435 

she is desirous of a second marriage (kutumbarkama), she shall be 
given on the occasion of her re-marriage (nivesakale) whatever either 
her father-in-law or her husband or both had given to her. The time 
at which women can re-marry shall be explained in connection with 
the subject of long sojourn of husbands. 

“If a widow marries any man other than of her father-in-law’s 
selection (svasurapratilomyenanivishta), she shall forfeit whatever 
had been given to her by her father-in-law and her deceased husband. 

“The kinsmen (gnatis) of a woman shall return to her old father- 
in-law whatever property of her own she had taken with her while, 
re-marrying a kinsman. Whoever justly takes a woman under his 
protection shall equally protect her property. No woman shall succeed 
in her attempt to establish her title to the property of her deceased 
husband, after she re-marries. 

“if she lives a pious life, she may enjoy it (dharmakama bhunjita). 
No woman with a son or sons shall (after re-marriage) be at liberty 
to make free use of her own property (stridhana); for that property 
of hers, her sons shall receive. 

“If a woman after re-marriage attempts to take possession of her 
own property under the plea of maintaining her sons by her former 
husband, she shall be made to endow it in their name. If a woman 
has many male children by many husbands, then she shall conserve, 
her property in the same condition as she had received from her 
husbands. Even that property which has been given her with full 
powers of enjoyment and disposal, a remarried woman shall endow 
in the name of her sons. 

“A barren widow who is faithful to the bed of her dead husband 
may, under the protection of her teacher, enjoy her property as long 
as she lives; for it is to ward off calamities that women are endowed 
with property. On her death, her property shall pass into the hands 
of her kinsman (Dayada). If the husband is alive and the wife is 
dead, then her sons and daughters shall divide her property among 
themselves. If there are no sons, her daughters shall have it. In their 
absence her husband shall take that amount of money (sulka) which he 
had given her, and her relatives shall re-take whatever in the shape 
of gift or dowry they had presented her. Thus the determination of 
the property of a woman is dealt with.” 

“Wives who belong to Sudra, Vaisya, Kshatriya or Brahman caste, 
and who have not given birth to children, should wait as long as a 
year, two, three and four years respectively for their husbands who 
have gone abroad for a short time; but if they are such as have 


z:\ambedkar\vol-3\vol3-04.indd MK SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 436 

436 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

given birth to children, they should wait for their absent husbands 
for more than a year. If they are provided with maintenance, they 
should wait for twice the period of time just mentioned. If they 
are not so provided with, their well-to-do gnatis should maintain 
them either for four or eight years. Then the gnatis should leave 
them to marry, after taking what had been presented to them on 
the occasion of their marriages. If the husband is a Brahman, 
studying abroad, his wife who has no issue should wait for him 
for ten years; but if she has given birth to children, she should 
wait for twelve years. If the hushand is a servant of the king, 
his wife should wait for him till her death; but even if she bears 
children to a savarna husband (i.e. a second husband belonging 
to the same gotra as that of the former husband), with a view 
to avoid the extinction of her race, she shall not be liable to 
contempt thereof (savarnatascha prajata na’ pavadam labheta). If 
the wife of an absent husband lacks maintenance and is deserted 
by well-to-do gnatis, she may remarry one whom she likes and 
who is in a position to maintian her and relieve her misery.” 

Unlike Manu every precaution was taken to guarantee economic 
independence to a married woman. This is clear from the following 
provisions in Kautilya’s Arthashastra relating to wife’s endowment 
and maintenance: 

“Means of subsistence (vruti) or jewellery (abadhya) constitutes 
what is called the property of a woman. Means of subsistence 
valued at above two thousand shall be endowed (in her name). 
There is no limit to jewellery. It is no guilt for the wife to make 
use of this property in maintaining her son, her daughter-in-law, 
or herself, whenever her absent husband has made no provision 
for her maintenance. In calamities, disease and famine, in warding 
off dangers and in charitable acts, the husband, too, may make 
use of this property. Neither shall there by any complaint against 
the enjoyment of this property by mutual consent by a couple who 
have brought forth a twin. Nor shall there be any complaint if 
this property has been enjoyed for three years by those who are 
wedded in accordance with the customs of the first four kinds 
of marriage. But the enjoyment of this property in the cases of 
Gandharva and Asura marriages shall be liable to be restored 
together with interest on it. In the case of such marriages as 
are called Rakshasa and Paisacha, the use of this property shall 
be dealt with as theft. Thus the duty of marriage is dealt with.” 


“A woman who has a right to claim maintenance for an 
unlimited period of time shall be given as much food and clothing 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


437 


THE WOMAN AND THE COUNTER-REVOLUTION 437 

(grasachhadan) as is necessary for her, or more than is necessary in 
proportion to the income of the maintainer (yatha-purushaparivapam 
va). If the period (for which such things are to be given to her 
with one-tenth of the amount in addition) is limited, then a certain 
amount of money, fixed in proportion to the income of the maintainer, 
shall be given to her; so also if she has not been given her sulka, 
property, and compensation (due to her for allowing her husband 
to re-marry). If she places herself under the protection of any one 
belonging to her father-in-law’s family (svasurkula), or if she begins 
to live independently, then her husband shall not be sued (for her 
maintenance). Thus the determination of maintenance is dealt with.” 

Surprising as it may appear in Kautilya’s time a wife could bring an 
action in a court of law against her husband for assault and defamation. 

In short in pre-Manu days a woman was free and equal partner of man. 

Why did Manu degrade her? 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\vo!3-04.indd 


MK SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


438 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


439 


PART IV 


Buddha or 
Karl Marx 


The Committee found three different typed 
copies of an essay on Buddha and Karl 
Marx in loose sheets, two of which have 
corrections in the author’s own handwriting. 
After scrutinizing these, this essay is compiled 
incorporating the corrections. The essay is 
divided into sub-topics as shown below: 

Introduction 

1. The Creed of the Buddha 

2. The Original Creed of Karl Marx 

3. What survives of the Marxian Creed 

4. Comparision between Buddha and Karl Marx 

5. Means 

6. Evaluation of Means 

7. Whose Means are More Efficacious ? 

8. Withering away of the State — Editors. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\vo!3-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


440 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


441 


CHAPTER 18 
Buddha or Karl Marx 

A comparison between Karl Marx and Buddha may be regarded as a 
joke. There need be no surprise in this. Marx and Buddha are divided by 
2381 years. Buddha was born in 563 B.C. and Karl Marx in 1818 A.D. 
Karl Marx is supposed to be the architect of a new ideology-polity — a 
new Economic system. The Buddha on the other hand is believed to be 
no more than the founder of a religion which has no relation to politics 
or economics. The heading of this essay “Buddha or Karl Marx” which 
suggests either a comparison or a contrast between two such personalities 
divided by such a lengthy span of time and occupied with different 
fields of thought is sure to sound odd. The Marxists may easily laugh 
at it and may ridicule the very idea of treating Marx and Buddha on 
the same level. Marx so modern and Buddha so ancient! The Marxists 
may say that the Buddha as compared to their master must be just 
primitive. What comparison can there be between two such persons? 
What could a Marxist learn from the Buddha ? What can Buddha teach 
a Marxist ? None-the-less a comparison between the two is a attractive 
and instructive. Having read both and being interested in the ideology of 
both a comparison between them just forces itself on me. If the Marxists 
keep back their prejudices and study the Buddha and understand what 
he stood for I feel sure that they will change their attitude. It is of 
course too much to expect that having been determined to scoff at the 
Buddha they will remain to pray. But this much can be said that they 
will realise that there is something in the Buddha’s teachings which is 
worth their while to take note of. 

I THE CREED OF THE BUDDHA 

The Buddha is generally associated with the doctrine of Ahimsa. 
That is taken to be the be-all and end-all of his teachings. Hardly any 
one knows that what the Buddha taught is something very vast; far 
beyond Ahimsa. It is therefore necessary to set out in detail his tenets. 
I enumerate them below as I have understood them from my reading 
of the Tripitaka : — 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


442 


442 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

1. Religion is necessary for a free Society. 

2. Not every Religion is worth having. 

3. Religion must relate to facts of life and not to theories and 
speculations about God, or Soul or Heaven or Earth. 

4. It is wrong to make God the centre of Religion. 

5. It is wrong to make salvation of the soul as the centre of Religion. 

6. It is wrong to make animal sacrifices to be the centre of religion. 

7. Real Religion lives in the heart of man and not in the Shastras. 

8. Man and morality must be the centre of Religion. If not, Religion 
is a cruel superstition. 

9. It is not enough for Morality to be the ideal of life. Since there is 
no God it must become the law of life. 

10. The function of Religion is to reconstruct the world and to make 
it happy and not to explain its origin or its end. 

11. That the unhappiness in the world is due to conflict of interest 
and the only way to solve it is to follow the Ashtanga Marga. 

12. That private ownership of property brings power to one class and 
sorrow to another. 

13. That it is necessary for the good of Society that this sorrow be 
removed by removing its cause. 

14. All human beings are equal. 

15. Worth and not birth is the measure of man. 

16. What is important is high ideals and not noble birth. 

17. Maitri or fellowship towards all must never be abandoned. One 
owes it even to one’s enemy. 

18. Every one has a right to learn. Learning is as necessary for man 
to live as food is. 

19. Learning without character is dangerous. 

20. Nothing is infallible. Nothing is binding forever. Every thing is 
subject to inquiry and examination. 

21. Nothing is final. 

22. Every thing is subject to the law of causation. 

23. Nothing is permanent or sanatan. Every thing is subject to change. 
Being is always Becoming. 

24. War is wrong unless it is for truth and justice. 

25. The victor has duties towards the vanquished. 

This is the creed of the Buddha in a summary form. How ancient but 
how fresh! How wide and how deep are his teachings! 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


443 


BUDDHA OR KARL MARX 443 

II THE ORIGINAL CREED OF KARL MARX 

Let us now turn to the creed of Karl Marx as originally propounded by 
him. Karl Marx is no doubt the father of modern socialism or Communism 
but he was not interested merely in propounding the theory of Socialism. 
That had been done long before him by others. Marx was more interested in 
proving that his Socialism was scientific. His crusade was as much against the 
capitalists as it was against those whom he called the Utopian Socialists. He 
disliked them both. It is necessary to note this point because Marx attached 
the greatest importance to the scientific character of his Socialism. All the 
doctrines which Marx propounded had no other purpose than to establish 
his contention that his brand of Socialism was scientific and not Utopian. 

By scientific socialism what Karl Marx meant was that his brand of 
socialism was inevitable and inescapable and that society was moving towards 
it and that nothing could prevent its march. It is to prove this contention of 
his that Marx principally laboured. 

Marx’s contention rested on the following theses. They were : — 

(i) That the purpose of philosophy is to reconstruct the world and 
not to explain the origin of the universe. 

(ii) That the forces which shapes the course of history are primarily 
economic. 

(iii) That society is divided into two classes, owners and workers. 

(iv) That there is always a class conflict going on between the two 
classes. 

(v) That the workers are exploited by the owners who misappropriate 
the surplus value which is the result of the workers’ labour. 

(vi) That this exploitation can be put an end to by nationalization of 
the instruments of production i.e. abolition of private property. 

(vii) That this exploitation is leading to greater and greater 
impoverishment of the workers. 

(viii) That this growing impoverishment of the workers is resulting 
in a revolutionary spirit among the workers and the conversion of the 
class conflict into a class struggle. 

(ix) That as the workers outnumber the owners, the workers are 
bound to capture the State and establish their rule which he called the 
dictatorship of the proletariat. 

(x) These factors are irresistible and therefore socialism is inevitable, 

I hope I have reported correctly the propositions which formed the original 
basis of Marxian Socialism. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


444 


444 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

III WHAT SURVIVES OF THE MARXIAN CREED 

Before making a comparison betwen the ideologies of the Buddha and 
Karl Marx it is necessary to note how much of this original corpus of the 
Marxian creed has survived; how much has been disproved by history 
and how much has been demolished by his opponents. 

The Marxian Creed was propounded sometime in the middle of the 
nineteenth century. Since then it has been subjected to much criticism. 
As a result of this criticism much of the ideological structure raised by 
Karl Marx has broken to pieces. There is hardly any doubt that Marxist 
claim that his socialism was inevitable has been completely disproved. 
The dictatorship of the Proletariat was first established in 1917 in one 
country after a period of something like seventy years after the publication 
of his Das Capital the gospel of socialism. Even when the Communism — 
which is another name for the dictatorship of the Proletariat — came to 
Russia, it did not come as something inevitable without any kind of 
human effort. There was a revolution and much deliberate planning had 
to be done with a lot of violence and bloodshed, before it could step into 
Russia. The rest of the world is still waiting for coming of the Proletarian 
Dictatorship. Apart from this general falsification of the Marxian thesis 
that Socialism is inevitable, many of the other propositions stated in the 
lists have also been demolished both by logic as well as by experience. 
Nobody now accepts the economic interpretation of history as the only 
explanation of history. Nobody accepts that the proletariat has been 
progressively pauperised. And the same is true about his other premises. 

What remains of the Karl Marx is a residue of fire, small but still 
very important. The residue in my view consists of four items : 

(i) The function of philosophy is to reconstruct the world and not 
to waste its time in explaining the origin of the world. 

(ii) That there is a conflict of interest between class and class. 

(iii) That private ownership of property brings power to one class 
and sorrow to another through exploitation. 

(iv) That it is necessary for the good of society that the sorrow 
be removed by the abolition of private property. 

IV COMPARISON BETWEEN BUDDHA AND KARL MARX 

Taking the points from the Marxian Creed which have survived one 
may now enter upon a comparison between the Buddha and Karl Marx. 

On the first point there is complete agreement between the Buddha 
and Karl Marx. To show how close is the agreement I quote below a 
part of the dialogue between Buddha and the Brahmin Potthapada. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


445 


BUDDHA OR KARL MARX 445 

“Then, in the same terms, Potthapada asked (the Buddha) each of the 
following questions: 

1. Is the world not eternal? 

2. Is the world finite? 

3. Is the world infinite? 

4. Is the soul the same as the body? 

5. Is the soul one thing, and the body another? 

6. Does one who has gained the truth live again after death? 

7. Does he neither live again, nor not live again, after death? 

And to each question the exalted one made the same reply: It was this. 

“That too, Potthapada, is a matter on which I have expressed no opinion”. 

28. “But why has the Exalted One expressed no opinion on that?” 
(Because) ‘This question is not calculated to profit, it is not concerned 
with (the Dhamma) it does not redound even to the elements of right 
conduct, nor to detachment nor to purification from lust, nor to quietude, 
nor to tranquilisation of heart, nor to real knowledge, nor to the insight 
(of the higher stages of the Path), nor to Nirvana. Therefore it is that I 
express no opinion upon it.” 

On the second point I give below a quotation from a dialogue between 
Buddha and Pasenadi King of Kosala : 

“Moreover, there is always strife going on between kings, between 
nobles, between Brahmins, between house holders, between mother and 
son, between son and father, between brother and sister, between sister 
and brother, between companion and companion...” 

Although these are the words of Pasenadi, the Buddha did not deny 
that they formed a true picture of society. 

As to the Buddha’s own attitude towards class conflict his doctrine of 
Ashtanga Marga recognises that class conflict exists and that it is the 
class conflict which is the cause of misery. 

On the third question I quote from the same dialogue of Buddha with 
Potthapada; 

“Then what is it that the Exalted One has determined?” 

“I have expounded, Potthapada, that sorrow and misery exist!” 

I have expounded, what is the origin of misery. I have expounded what 
is the cessation of misery; I have expounded what is method by which 
one may reach the cessation of misery. 

30. ‘And why has the Exalted One put forth a statement as to that?’ 

‘Because that questions Potthapada, is calculated to profit, is 
concerned with the Dhamma redounds to the beginnings of right 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


446 


446 


DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


conduct, to detachment, to purification from lusts, to quitude, to 
tranquilisation of heart, to real knowledge, to the insight of the higher 
stages of the Path and to Nirwana. Therefore is it, Potthapada that I 
have put forward a statement as to that.’ 

That language is different but the meaning is the same. If for misery 
one reads exploitation Buddha is not away from Marx. 

On the question of private property the following extract from a 
dialogue between Buddha and Ananda is very illuminating. In reply to 
a question by Ananda the Buddha said : 

“I have said that avarice is because of possession. Now in what way 
that is so, Ananda, is to be understood after this manner. Where there 
is no possession of any sort or kind whatever by any one or anything, 
then there being no possession whatever, would there, owing to this 
cessation of possession, be any appearance of avarice?” 

‘There would not, Lord’. 

‘Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the basis, the genesis, 
the cause of avarice, to wit, possession. 

31. ‘I have said that tenacity is the cause possession. Now in what 
way that is so, Ananda, is to be understood after this manner. Were 
there no tenacity of any sort or kind whatever shown by any one with 
respect to any thing, then there being whatever, would there owing to 
this cessation of tenacity, be any appearance of possession?’ 

‘There would not, Lord.’ 

‘Wherefore, Ananda, just that is the ground, the basis, the genesis, 
the cause of possession, to wit tenacity.’ 

On the fourth point no evidence is necessary. The rules of the Bhikshu 
Sangh will serve as the best testimony on the subject. 

According to the rules a Bhikku can have private property only in the 
following eight articles and no more. These eight articles are : — 


4. a girdle for the loins. 

5. an alms-bowl. 

6. a razor. 

7. a needle. 

8. a water strainer. 

Further a Bhikku was completely forbidden to receive gold or silver 
for fear that with gold or silver he might buy some thing beside the 
eight things he is permitted to have. 


4 . 


! Three robes or pieces of cloth for daily wear. 



z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


447 


BUDDHA OR KARL MARX 447 

These rules are far more rigourous than are to be found in communism 
in Russia. 

V THE MEANS 

We must now come to the means. The means of bringing about 
Communism which the Buddha propounded were quite definite. The 
means can be decided into three parts. 

Part I consisted in observing the Pancha Silas. 

The Enlightenment gave birth to a new gospel which contains the key 
to the solution of the problem which was haunting him. 

The foundation of the New Gospel is the fact that the world was full 
of misery and unhappiness. It was fact not merely to be noted but to 
be regarded as being the first and foremost in any scheme of salvation. 
The recongnition of this fact the Buddha made the starting point of his 
gospel. 

To remove this misery and unhappiness was to him the aim and object 
of the gospel if it is to serve any useful purpose. 

Asking what could be the causes of this misery the Buddha found 
that there could be only two. 

A part of the misery and unhappiness of man was the result of his 
own misconduct. To remove this cause of misery he preached the practice 
of Panch Sila. 

The Panch Sila comprised the following observations: 

(1) To abstain from destroying or causing destruction of any living 
thing; (2) To abstain from stealing i.e. acquiring or keeping by fraud or 
violence, the property of another; (3) To Abstain from telling untruth; 
(4) To abstain from lust; (5) To abstain from intoxicating drinks. 

A part of the misery and unhappiness in the world was according to 
the Buddha the result of man’s inequity towards man. How was this 
inequity to be removed ? For the removal of man’s inequity towards man 
the Buddha prescribed the Noble Eight-Fold Path. The elements of the 
Noble Eight-Fold Path are: 

(1) Right views i.e. freedom from superstition; (2) Right aims, high 
and worthy of the intelligent and earnest men; (3) Right speech i.e. 
kindly, open, truthful; (4) Right Conduct i.e. peaceful, honest and 
pure; (5) Right livelihood i.e. causing hurt or injury to no living being; 
(6) Right perseverence in all the other seven; (7) Right mindfulness i.e. 
with a watchful and active mind; and (8) Right contemplation i.e. earnest 
thought on the deep mysteries of life. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


448 


448 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The aim of the Noble Eight-Fold Path is to establish on earth the 
kingdom of righteousness, and thereby to banish sorrow and unhappiness 
from the face of the world. 

The third part of the Gospel is the doctrine of Nibbana. The doctrine 
of Nibbana is an integral part of the doctrine of the Noble Eight-Fold 
Path. Without Nibbana the realization of the Eight-Fold Path cannot 
be accompalished. 

The doctrine of Nibbana tells what are the difficulties in the way of 
the realization of the Eight-Fold Path. 

The chief of these difficulties are ten in number. The Buddha called 
them the Ten Asavas, Fetters or Hinderances. 

The first hindrance is the delusion of self. So long as a man is 
wholly occupied with himself, chasing after every bauble that he vainly 
thinks will satisfy the cravings of his heart, there is no noble path for 
him. Only when his eyes have been opened to the fact that he is but a 
tiny part of a measureless whole, only when he begins to realize how 
impermanent a thing is his temporary individuality, can he even enter 
upon this narrow path. 

The second is Doubt and Indecision. When a man’s eyes are opened to 
the great mystery of existence, the impermanence of every individuality, 
he is likely to be assailed by doubt and indecision as to I his action. 
To do or not to do, after all my individuality is impermanent, why do 
anything are questions, which make him I indecisive or inactive. But that 
will not do in life. He must make up his mind to follow the teacher, to 
accept the truth and to enter on the struggle or he will get no further. 

The third is dependence on the efficacy of Rites and Ceremonies. 
No good resolutions, however firm will lead to anything unless a man 
gets rid of ritualism; of the belief that any outward acts, any priestly 
powers, and holy ceremonies, can afford him an assistance of any kind. 
It is only when he has overcome this hindrance, that men can be said 
to have fairly entered upon the stream and has a chance sooner or later 
to win a victory. 

The fourth consists of the bodily passions. 

The fifth is ill-will towards other invididuals. 

The sixth is the suppression of the desire for a future life with a 
material body and the seventh is the desire for a future life in an 
immaterial world. 

The eighth hindrance is Pride and nineth is Self-Righteousness. These 
are failings which it is most difficult for men to overcome, and to which 
superior minds are peculiarly liable — a Praisaical contempt for those who 
are less able and less holy than themselves. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


449 


BUDDHA OR KARL MARX 449 

The tenth hindrance is ignorance. When all other difficulties are 
conquered this will even remain, the thorn in the flesh of the wise and 
good, the last enemy and the bitterest foe of man. 

Nibbana consists in overcoming these hindrances to the pursuit of the 
Noble Eight-Fold Path. 

The doctrine of the Noble Eight-Fold Path tells what disposition of the 
mind which a person should sedulously cultivate. The doctrine of Nibbana 
tells of the temptation or hindrance which a person should earnestly 
overcome if he wishes to trade along with the Noble Eight-Fold Path. 

The Fourth Part of the new Gospel is the doctrine of Paramitas. 

The doctrine of Paraimitas inculcates the practice of ten virtues in 
one’s daily life. 

These are those ten virtues — (1) Panna (2) Sila (3) Nekkhama (4) Dana 
(5) Virya (6) Khanti (7) Succa (8) Aditthana (9) Metta and (10) Upekkha. 

Panna or wisdom is the light that removes the darkenss of Avijja, 
Moha or Nescience. The Panna requires that one must get all his doubts 
removed by questioning those wiser than himself, associate with the 
wise and cultivate the different arts and sciences which help to develop 
the mind. 

Sila is moral temperament, the disposition not to do evil and the 
disposition to do good; to be ashamed of doing wrong. To avoid to do evil 
for fear of punishment is Sila. Sila means fear of doing wrong. 

Nekkhama is renunciation of the pleasures of the world. 

Dana means the giving of one’s possessions, blood and limbs and even 
one’s life for the good of the others without expecting anything in return. 

Virya is right endeavour. It is doing with all your might with thought 
never turning back, whatever you have undertaken to do. 

Khanti is forbearance. Not to meet hatred by harted is the essence of it. 
For hatred is not appeased by hatred. It is appeased only by forbearance. 

Succa is truth. An aspirant for Buddha never speak a lie. His speech 
is truth and nothing but truth. 

Aditthana is resolute determination to reach the goal. 

Metta is fellow-feeling extending to all beings, foe and friend, beast 
and man. 

Upekkha is detachment as distinguished from indifference. It is a state 
of mind where there is neither like nor dislike. Remaining unmoved by 
the result and yet engaged in the pursuit of it. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


450 


450 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

These virtues one must practice to his utmost capacity. That is why 
they are called Paramitas (States of Perfection). 

Such is the gospel the Buddha enunciated as a result of his 
enlightenment to end the sorrow and misery in the world. 

It is clear that the means adopted by the Buddha were to convert a 
man by changing his moral disposition to follow the path voluntarily. 

The means adopted by the Communists are equally clear, short and 
swift. They are (1) Violence and (2) Dictatorship of the Proletariat. 

The Communists say that there are the only two means of establishing 
communism. The first is violence. Nothing short of it will suffice to 
break up the existing system. The other is dictatorship of the proletariat. 
Nothing short of it will suffice to continue the new system. 

It is now clear what are the similarities and differences between 
Buddha and Karl Marx. The differences are about the means. The end 
is common to both. 

VI EVALUATION OF MEANS 

We must now turn to the evaluation of means. We must ask whose 
means are superior and lasting in the long run. There are, however, 
some misunderstandings on both sides. It is necessary to clear them up. 

Take violence. As to violence there are many people who seem to 
shiver at the very thought of it. But this is only a sentiment. Violence 
cannot be altogether dispensed with. Even in non-communist countries 
a murderer is hanged. Does not hanging amount to violence? Non- 
Communist countries go to war with non-Communist countries. Millions 
of people are killed. Is this no violence ? If a murderer can be killed, 
because he has killed a citizen, if a soldier can be killed in war because 
he belongs to a hostile nation why cannot a property owner be killed 
if his ownership leads to misery for the rest of humanity ? There is no 
reason to make an exception in favour of the property owner, why one 
should regard private property as sacrosanct. 

The Buddha was against violence. But he was also in favour of justice 
and where justice required he permitted the use of force. This is well 
illustrated in his dialogue with Sinha Senapati the Commander-in-Chief 
of Vaishali. Sinha having come to know that the Buddha I preached 
Ahimsa went to him and asked: 

“The Bhagvan preaches Ahimsa. Does the Bhagvan preach an offender 

to be given freedom from punishment ? Does the Bhagvan preach that 

we should not go to war to save our wives, our children and our wealth ? 

Should we suffer at the hands of criminals in the name of Ahimsa.?” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


451 


BUDDHA OR KARL MARX 451 

“Does the Tathagata prohibit all war even when it is in the interest 

of Truth and Justice?” 

Buddha replied, You have wrongly understood what I have been 
preaching. An offender must be punished and an innocent man must 
be freed. It is not a fault of the Magistrate if he punishes an offender. 
The cause of punishment is the fault of the offender. The Magistrate 
who inflicts the punishment is only carrying out the law. He does not 
become stained with Ahimsa. A man who fights for justice and safety 
cannot be accused of Ahimsa. If all the means of maintaining peace 
have failed then the responsibility for Himsa falls on him who starts 
war. One must never surrender to evil powers. War there may be. But 
it must not be for selfish ends....” 

There are of course other grounds against violence such as those urged 
by Prof. John Dewey. In dealing with those who contend that the end 
justifies the means is morally perverted doctrine, Dewey has rightly 
asked what can justify the means if not the end ? It is only the end 
that can justify the means. 

Buddha would have probably admitted that it is only the end which 
would justify the means. What else could ? And he would have said 
that if the end justified violence, violence was a legitimate means for 
the end in view. He certainly would not have exempted property owners 
from force if force was the only means for that end. As we shall see his 
means for the end were different. As prof. Dewey has pointed out that 
violence is only another name for the use of force and although force 
must be used for creative purposes a distinction between use of force as 
energy and use of force as violence needs to be made. The achievement 
of an end involves the destruction of many other ends which are integral 
with the one that is sought to be, destroyed. Use of force must be so 
regulated that it should save as many ends as possible in destroying the 
evil one. Buddha’s Ahimsa was not as absolute as the Ahimsa preached 
by Mahavira the founder of Jainism. He would have allowed force only 
as energy. The Communists preach Ahimsa as an absolute principle. To 
this the Buddha was deadly opposed. 

As to Dictatorship the Buddha would have none of it. He was born 
a democrat and he died a democart. At the time he lived there were 
14 monarchical states and 4 republics. He belonged to the Sakyas and 
the Sakya’s kingdom was a republic. He was extremely in love with 
Vaishali which was his second home because it was a republic. Before 
his Mahaparinirbban he spent his Varshavasa in Vaishali. After the 
completion of his Varshavasa he decided to leave Vaishali and go 
elsewhere as was his wont. After going some distance he looked back 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


452 


452 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

on Vaishali and said to Ananda. “This is the last look of Vaishali which 
the Tathagata is having”. So fond was he of this republic. 

He was a thorough equalitarian. Originally the Bhikkus, including the 
Buddha himself, wore robes made of rags. This rule was enunciated to 
prevent the aristocratic classes from joining the Sangh. Later Jeevaka 
the great physician prevailed upon the Buddha to accept a robe which 
was made of a whole cloth. The Buddha at once altered the rule and 
extended it to all the monks. 

Once the Buddha’s mother Mahaprajapati Gotami who had joined the 
Bhikkuni Sangh heard that the Buddha had got a chill. She at once 
started preparing a scarf for him. After having completed it she took 
to the Buddha and asked him to wear it. But he refused to accept it 
saying that if it is a gift it must be a gift to the whole Sangh and not 
to an individual member of the Sangh. She pleaded and pleaded but he 
refused to yield. 

The Bhikshu Sangh had the most democratic constitution. He was 
only one of the Bhikkus. At the most he was like a Prime Minister 
among members of the Cabinet. He was never a dictator. Twice before 
his death he was asked to appoint some one as the head of the Sangh 
to control it. But each time he refused saying that the Dhamma is the 
Supreme Commander of the Sangh. He refused to be a dictator and 
refused to appoint a dictator. 

What about the value of the means? Whose means are superior and 
lasting in the long run? 

Can the Communists say that in achieving their valuable end they 
have not destroyed other valuable ends? They have destroyed private 
property. Assuming that this is a valuable end can the Communists 
say that they have not destroyed other valuable end in the process of 
achieving it? How many people have they killed for achieving their end. 
Has human life no value ? Could they not have taken property without 
taking the life of the owner? 

Take dictatorship. The end of Dictatorship is to make the Revolution 
a permanent revolution. This is a valuable end. But can the Communists 
say that in achieving this end they have not destroyed other valuable 
ends ? Dictatorship is often defined as absence of liberty or absence of 
Parliamentary Government. Both interpretations are not quite clear. 
There is no liberty even when there is Parliamentary Government. 
For law means want of liberty. The difference between Dictatorship 
and Parliamentary Govt, lies in this. In Parliamentary Government 
every citizen has a right to criticise the restraint on liberty imposed 
by the Government. In Parliamentary Government you have 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


453 


BUDDHA OR KARL MARX 453 

a duty and a right; the duty to obey the law and right to critise it. 
In Dictatorship you have only duty to obey but no right to criticise it. 

VII WHOSE MEANS ARE MORE EFFICACIOUS 

We must now consider whose means are more lasting. One has 
to chose between Government by force and Government by moral 
disposition. 

As Burke has said force cannot be a lasting means. In his speech 
on conciliation with America he uttered this memorable warning : 

“First, Sir, permit me to observe, that the use of force alone is but 
temporary. It may subdue for a moment; but it does not remove the 
necessity of subduing again; and a nation is not governed which is 
perpetually to be conquered.” 

“My next objection is its uncertainty. Terror is not always the effect 
of force, and an armament is not a victory. If you do not succeed, you 
are without resource, for, conciliation failing, force remains; but force 
failing, no further hope of reconciliation is left. Power and authority 
are sometimes bought by kindness; but they can never be begged as 
alms by an impoverised and defeated violence. 

A further objection to force is, that you impair the object by your very 
endeavours to preserve it. The thing you fought for is the thing which 
you recover, but depreciated, sunk, wasted and consumed in the contest.” 

In a sermon addressed to the Bhikkus the Buddha has shown the 
difference between the rule by Righteousness and Rule by law i.e. 
force. Addressing the Brethren he said : 

(2) Long long ago, brethren, there was Sovereign overlord named 
Strongtyre, a king ruling in righteousness, lord of the four quarters of 
the earth, conqueror, the protector of his people. He was the possessor 
of the celestial wheel. He lived in supremacy over this earth to its 
ocean bounds, having conquered it, not by the courage, not by the 
sword, but by righteousness. 

(3) Now, brethren, after many years, after many hundred years, after 
manu thousand years, king Strongtyre command a certain man, saying: 

“Thou shouldest see. Sir, the Celestial Wheel has sunk a little, has 
slipped down from its place, bring me word.” 

Now after many many hundred years had slipped down from its 
place On seeing this he went to King Strongtyre and said: “Know, 
sire, for a truth that the Celestial Wheel has sunk, has slipped down 
from its place.” 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


454 


454 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

The king Strongtyre, brethren, let the prince his eldest son be sent 
for and spake thus: 

‘Behold, dear boy, my Celestial Wheel has sunk a little, has slipped 
down from its place. Now it has been told me; If the Celestial Wheel of a 
wheel turning King shall sink down, shall slip down from its place, that 
king has not much longer to live. I have had my fill of human pleasures; 
‘It’s time to seek after divine joys, Come, dear boy, take thou charge over 
this earth bounded by the ocean. But I, shaving hair and beard, and 
donning yellow robes, will go forth from home into the homeless state. 

So brethren, King Strongtyre, having in due form established his 
eldest son on the throne, shaved hair and beared, donned yellow robes 
and went forth from home into homeless state. But on the seventh day 
after the royal hermit had gone forth, the Celestial Wheel disappeared. 

(4) Then a certain man went to the King, and told him, saying: Know, 
O King, for a truth, that the Celestial Wheel has disappeared ! 

Then that King, brethren, was grieved thereat and afflicted with 
sorrow. And he went to the royal hermit, and told him, saying: Know, 
sire, for a truth, that the Celestial Wheel has disappeared. 

And the anointed king so saying, the royal hermit made reply. Grieve 
thou not, dear son, that the Celestial Wheel has disappeared, nor be 
afflicted that the Celestial Wheel has disappeared. For no paternal 
heritage of thine, dear son, is the Celestial Wheel. But verily, dear son, 
turn thou in the Ariyan turning of the Wheel-turners. (Act up to the 
noble ideal of duty set before themselves by the true sovereigns of the 
world). Then it may well be that if thou carry out the Ariyan duty of 
a Wheel-turning Monarch, and on the feast of the moon thou wilt for, 
with bathed head to keep the feast on the chief upper terrace, to the 
Celestial Wheel will manifest, itself with its thousand spokes its tyre, 
navel and all its part complete. 

(5) ‘But what, sire is this Ariya duty of a Wheel-turning Monarch?’ 

This, dear son, that thou, leaning on the Norm (the law of truth and 
righteousness) honouring, respecting and revering it, doing homage to 
it, hallowing it, being thyself a Norm-banner, a Norm-signal, having 
the Norm as thy master, shouldest provide the right watch, ward, and 
protection for thine own folk, for the army, for the nobles, for vassals, 
for brahmins and house holders, for town and country dwellers, for the 
religious world, and for beasts and birds. Throughout thy kingdom let 
no wrong doing prevail. And whosoever in thy kingdom is poor, to him 
let wealth be given. 

‘And when dear son, in thy kingdom men of religious life, 
renouncing the carelessness arising from intoxication of the senses, and 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


455 


BUDDHA OR KARL MARX 455 

devoted to forbearance and sympathy, each mastering self, each claiming 
self, each protecting self, shall come to thee from time to time, and 
question thee concerning what is good and what is bad, what is criminal 
and what is not, what is to be done and what is to be left undone, what 
line of action will in the long run work for weal or for woe, thou shouldest 
hear what they have to say and thou shouldest deter them from evil, 
and bid them take up what is good. This, dear son, is the Ariyan duty 
of a sovereign of the world.’ 

‘Even so,’ sire, answered the anointed king, and obeying, carried out 
the Ariyan duty of a sovereign lord. To him, thus behaving, when on 
the feast of the full moon he had gone in the observance with bathed 
head to the chief upper terrance the Celestial Wheel revealed itself, with 
its thousand spokes, its tyre, its naval, and all its part complete. And 
seeing this is occured to the king: ‘It has been told me that a king to 
whom on such a occasion the Celestial Wheel reveals itself completely, 
becomes a Wheel-turning monarch. May I even I also become a sovereign 
of the world.’ 

(6) Then brethren, the king arose from his seat and uncovering his 
robe from one shoulder, took in his left hand a pitcher, and with his 
right hand sprinkled up over the Celestial Wheel, saying: ‘Roll onward, 
O Lord Wheel! Go forth and overcome, O Lord Wheel!’ 

Then, brethern, the Celestial Wheel rolled onwards towards the region 
of the East, and after it went the Wheel-turning king, and with him 
his army, horses and chariots and elephants and men. And in whatever 
place, brethren, the wheel stopped, there the king, the victorious war- 
lord, took up his abode, and with him his fourfold army. Then the all, 
the rival kings in the region of the East came to the sovereign king 
and said ‘Come, O mighty king! Welcome, O mighty king! All is thine, 
O mighty King! Teach us, O mighty king!’ 

The king, the sovereign war-lord, spake thus: ‘Ye shall slay no living 
thing. Ye shall not take that which has not been given. Ye shall not act 
wrongly touching bodily desires. Ye shall speak no lie. Ye shall drink no 
maddening drink. Enjoy your possessions as you have been want to do.’ 

(7) Then, brethern, the Celestial Wheel, plunging down to the Eastern 
ocean, rose up out again, and rolled onwards to the region of the south.... 
(and there all happened as had happend in the East). And in like manner 
the Celestial Wheel, plunging into Southern ocean, rose up out again and 
rolled onward to the region of the West... and of the North; and there 
too happened as had happened in the Southern and West. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


456 


456 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Then when the Celestial Wheel had gone forth conquering over the 
whole earth to its ocean boundry, it returned to the royal city, and 
stood, so that one might think it fixed, in front of the judgement hall at 
entrance to the inner apartments of the king, the Wheel-turner, lighting 
up with its glory the facade of the inner apartments of the king, the 
sovereign of the world. 

(8) And a second king, brethern, also a Wheel-turning monarch;... and 
a third... and a fourth... and a fifth... and a sixth... and a seventh king, 
a victorious war-lord, after many years, after many hundred years, after 
many thousand years, command a certain man, saying : 

‘If thou should’est see, sirrah, that the Celestial Wheel has sunk down, 
has slid from its place, bring me word.’ 

‘Even so, sire,’ replied the man. 

So after many years, after many hundred years, after many thousand 
years, that man saw that the Celestial Wheel had sunk down, had 
become dislodged from its place. And so seeing he went to the king, the 
war-lord, and told him. 

Then that king did (even as Strongtyre had done). And on the seventh 
day after the royal hermit had gone forth the Celestial Wheel disappeared. 

Then a certain man went and told the King. Then the King was 
grieved at the disappearance of the wheel, and afflicted with grief. But 
he did not go to the hermit-king to ask concerning the Ariyan Duty of 
sovereign war-lord. But his own ideas, forsooth, he governed his people; 
and they so governed differently from what they had been, did not prosper 
as they used to do under former kings who had carried out the Arivan 
duty of a sovereign king. 

Then, brethren, the ministers and courtiers, the finance officials, the 
guards and door keepers and they who lived by sacred verses came to 
the King and spake thus : 

‘Thy people, O king, whilst thou governest them by thine own ideas, 
differently from the way to which they were used when former kings 
were carrying out the Arivan Duty prosper not. Now there are in thy 
kingdom ministers and courtiers, finance officers, guards and custodians, 
and they who live by sacred verses — both all of us and others — who keep 
the knowledge of the Ariyan duty of the sovereign king. Lo ! O king, do 
thou ask us concerning it; to thee thus asking will we declare it.’ 

9. Then, brethren, the king, having made the ministers and all the 
rest sit down together, asked them about the Ariyan duty of Sovereign 
war-lord, And they declared it unto him. And when he had heard 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


457 


BUDDHA OR KARL MARX 457 

them, he did provide the due watch and ward protection, but on the 
destitute he bestowed no wealth and because this was not done, poverty 
became widespread. 

When poverty was thus become rife, a certain man took that which 
others had not given him, what people call by theft. Him they caught, and 
brought before the king, saying: ‘This man, O king has taken that which 
was not given to him and that is theft’. 

Thereupon the king spake thus to the man. ‘Is it true sirrah, that thou 
hast taken what no man gave thee, hast committed what men call theft.’ 

‘It is ture, O king.’ 

‘But why?’. 

‘O king, I have nothing to keep me alive.’ Then the king bestowed wealth 
on that man, saying: ‘With this wealth sir, do thou both keep thyself alive, 
maintain thy parents, maintain children and wife, carry on thy business.’ 

‘Even so, O king,’ replied the man. 

10. Now another man, brethern, took by theft what was not given him. 
Him they caught and brought before the king and told him, saying: ‘this 
man, O king, hath taken by theft what was not given him’. 

And the king (spoke and did even as he had spoken and done to the 
former man.) 

11. Now men heard brethren, that to them who had taken by theft 
what was not given them, the King was giving wealth. And hearing they 
thought, let us then take by theft what has not been given us. 

Now a certain man did so. And him they caught and charged before the 
king who (as before) asked him why he had stolen. 

‘Because, O king I cannot maintain myself’. 

Then the king thought: If I bestow wealth on anyone so ever who has 
taken by theft what was not given him, there will be hereby and increase 
of this stealing. Let me now put final stop to this and inflict condign 
punishment on him, have his head cut off! 

So he bade his man saying: ‘Now look ye! bind this man’s arms behind 
him with a strong rope and tight knot, shave his head bald, lead him around 
with a harsh sounding drum, from road to road, from cross ways to cross 
ways, take him out by the southern gate and to the south of the town, 
put a final stop to this, inflict on him uttermost penalty, cut of his head.’ 

‘Even so , O king’ answered the men, and carried out his commands. 

12. Now men heard, brethren, that they who took by theft what was 
not given them were thus put to death. And hearing they thought: 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


458 


458 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

Let us also now have sharp swords made ready for themselves, and 
them from whom we take what is not given us — what they call them — 
let us put a final stop to them, inflict on them uttermost penalty, and 
their heads off. 

And they got themselves sharp swords, and came forth to sack village 
and town and city, and to work highway robbery. And then whom they 
robbed they made an end of, cutting off their heads. 

13. Thus, brethren, from goods not being bestowed on the destitute 
poverty grieve rife; from poverty growing rife stealing increased, from 
the spread of stealing violence grew space, from the growth of violence 
the destruction of life common, from the frequency of murder both the 
span of life in those beings and their comeliness also (diminished). 

Now among humans of latter span of life, brethren, a certain took 
by theft what was not given him and even as those others was accused 
before the king and questioned if it was true that he had stolen. 

‘Nay, O king,’ he replied, ‘they are delibarately telling lies.’ 

14. Thus from goods not being bestowed on the destitute, poverty grew 
rife... stealing... violence... murder... until lying grew common. 

Again a certain man reported to the king, saying: ‘such and such 
a man, O king! has taken by theft what was not given him’ — thus 
speaking evil of him. 

15. And so, brethren, from goods not being bestowed on the destitute 
poverty grew rife... stealing... violence... murder... lying... evil speaking 
grew abundant. 

16. From lying there grew adultery. 

17. Thus from goods not being bestowed on the destitute, poverty... 
stealing... violence... murder... lying... rvil speaking... immorality grew rife. 

18. Among (them) brethren, three things grew space incest, wanton 
greed and perverted lust. 

Then these things grew apace lack of filial piety to mother and father, 
lack of religious piety to holy men, lack of regard for the head of the clan. 

19. There will come a time, brethren, when the descendants of those 
humans will have a life-span of ten years. Among humans of this life- 
span, maidens of five years will be of a marriageable age. Among such 
humans these kinds of tastes (savours) will disappear; ghee, butter, 
oil of tila, sugar, salt. Among such humans kudrusa grain will be 
the highest kind of food. Even as to-day rice and curry is the highest 
kind of food, so will kudrusa grain will be then. Among such humans 
the ten moral courses of conduct will altogether disappear, the ten 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


459 


BUDDHA OR KARL MARX 459 

immoral courses of action will flourish excessively; there will be no word 
for moral among such humans, the ten moral courses of conduct will 
altogether disappear, the ten immoral courses of action will flourish 
excessively, there will be no word for moral among such humans — far 
less any moral agent. Among such humans, brethren, they who lack filian 
and religious piety, and show no respect for the Head of the clan — ’tis 
they to whom homage and praise will be given, just as to-day homage 
and praise are given to the filial minded, to the pious and to them who 
respect the heads of their clans. 

20. Among such humans, brethren, there will be no (such thoughts of 
reverence as are a bar to intermarriage with) mother, or mother’s sister, 
or mother’s sister-in-law, or teacher’s wife, or father’s sister-in-law. The 
world will fall into promiscuity, like goats and sheep, fowls and swine, 
dogs and jackals. 

Among such humans, brethren keen mutual enmity will become the 
rule, keen ill-will, keen animosity, passionate thoughts even of killing, 
in a mother towards her child, in a child towards its father, in brother 
to brother, in brother to sister, in sister to brother. Just a sportsman 
feels towards the game that he sees, so will they feel. 

This is probably the finest picture of what happens when moral force 
fails and brutal force takes its place. What the Buddha wanted was that 
each man should be morally so trained that he may himself become a 
sentinal for the kingdom of righteousness. 

VIII WITHERING AWAY OF THE STATE 

The Communists themselves admit that their theory of the State as 
a permanent dictatorship is a weakness in their political philosophy. 
They take shelter under the plea that the State will ultimately wither 
away. There are two questions which they have to answer. When will 
it wither away ? What will take the place of the State when it withers 
away? To the first question they can give no definite time. Dictatorship 
for a short period may be good and a welcome thing even for making 
Democracy safe. Why should not Dictatorship liquidate itself after it 
has done its work, after it has removed all the obstacles and boulders 
in the way of democracy and has made the path of Democracy safe. Did 
not Asoka set an example ? He practised violence against the Kalingas. 
But thereafter he renounced violence completely. If our victors to-day 
not only disarm their victims but also disarm themselves there would 
be peace all over the world. 

The Communists have given no answer. At any rate no satisfactory 
answer to the question what would take the place of the State when 
it withers away, though this question is more important than the 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


460 


460 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

question when the State will wither away. Will it be succeded by Anarchy ? 
If so the building up of the Communist State is an useless effort. If it 
cannot be sustained except by force and if it results in anarchy when 
the force holding it together is withdrawn what good is the Communist 
State. 

The only thing which could sustain it after force is withdrawn is 
Religion. But to the Communists Religion is anathema. Their hatred to 
Religion is so deep seated that they will not even discriminate between 
religions which are helpful to Communism and religions which are not. 
The Communists have carried their hatred of Christianity to Buddhism 
without waiting to examine the difference between the two. The charge 
against Christianity levelled by the Communists was two-fold. Their 
first charge against Christianity was that they made people other 
worldliness and made them suffer poverty in this world. As can be seen 
from quotations from Buddhism in the earlier part of this tract such a 
charge cannot be levelled against Buddhism. 

The second charge levelled by the Communists against Christianity 
cannot be levelled against Buddhism. This charge is summed up in 
the statement that Religion is the opium of the people. This charge 
is based upon the Sermon on the Mount which is to be found in the 
Bible. The Sermon on the Mount sublimates poverty and weakness. It 
promises heaven to the poor and the weak. There is no Sermon on the 
Mount to be found in the Buddha’s teachings. His teaching is to acquire 
wealth. I give below his Sermon on the subject to Anathapindika one 
of his disciples. 

Once Anathapindika came to where the Exalted One was staying. 
Having come he made obeisance to the Exalted One and took a seat 
at one side and asked ‘Will the Enlightened One tell what things are 
welcome, pleasant, agreeable, to the householder but which are hard 
to gain.’ 

The Enlightened One having heard the question put to him said ‘Of 
such things the first is to acquire wealth lawfully.’ 

‘The second is to see that your relations also get their wealth lawfully.’ 

‘The third is to live long and reach great age.’ 

‘Of a truth, householder, for the attainment of these four things, which 
in the world are welcome, pleasant agreeable but hard to gain, there 
are also four conditions precedent. They are the blessing of faith, the 
blessing of virtuous conduct, the blessing of liberality and the blessing 
of wisdom. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


461 


BUDDHA OR KARL MARX 461 

The Blessing of virtuous conduct which abstains from taking life, 
thieving, unchastity, lying and partaking of fermented liquor. 

The blessing of liberality consists in the householder living with mind 
freed from the taint of avarice, generous, open-handed, delightening in 
gifts, a good one to be asked and devoted to the distribution of gifts. 

Wherein consists the blessing of Widsom? He know that an householder 
who dwells with mind overcome by greed, avarice, ill-will, sloth, 
drowsiness, distraction and flurry, and also about, commits wrongful 
deeds and neglects that which ought to be done, and by so doing deprived 
of happiness and honour. 

Greed, avarice, ill-will, sloth and drowsiness, distraction and flurry 
and doubt are stains of the mind. An householder who gets rid of such 
stains of the mind acquires great wisdom, abundant wisdom, clear vision 
and perfect wisdom. 

Thus to acquire wealth legitimately and justly, earn by great industry, 
amassed by strength of the arm and gained by sweat of the brow is a 
great blessing. The householder makes himself happy and cheerful and 
preserves himself full of happines; also makes his parents, wife, and 
children, servants, and labourers, friends and companions happy and 
cheerful, and preserves them full of happiness. 

The Russians do not seem to be paying any attention to Buddhism 
as an ultimate aid to sustain Communism when force is withdrawn. 

The Russians are proud of their Communism. But they forget that the 
wonder of all wonders is that the Buddha established Communism so 
far as the Sangh was concerned without dictatorship. It may be that it 
was a communism on a very small scale but it was communism without 
dictatorship a miracle which Lenin failed to do. 

The Buddha’s method was different. His method was to change the 
mind of man: to alter his disposition: so that whatever man does, he 
does it voluntarily without the use of force or compulsion. His main 
means to alter the disposition of men was his Dhamma and the constant 
preaching of his Dhamma. The Buddhas way was not to force people to 
do what they did not like to do although it was good for them. His way 
was to alter the disposition of men so that they would do voluntarily 
what they would not otherwise to do. 

It has been claimed that the Communist Dictatorship in Russia 
has wonderful achievements to its credit. There can be no denial 
of it. That is why I say that a Russian Dictatorship would be good 
for all backward countries. But this is no argument for permanent 
Dictatorship. Humanity does not only want economic values, it also 
wants spiritual values to be retained. Permanent Dictatorship has paid 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


462 


462 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

no attention to spiritual values and does not seem to intend to. Carlyle 
called Political Economy a Pig Philosophy. Carlyle was of course wrong. 
For man needs material comforts. But the Communist Philosophy seems 
to be equally wrong for the aim of their philosophy seems to be fatten 
pigs as though men are no better than pigs. Man must grow materially 
as well as spiritually. Society has been aiming to lay a new foundation 
was summarised by the French Revolution in three words, Freternity, 
Liberty and Equality. The French Revolution was welcomed because 
of this slogan. It failed to produce equality. We welcome the Russian 
Revolution because it aims to produce equality. But it cannot be too much 
emphasized that in producing equality society cannot afford to sacrifice 
fraternity or liberty. Equality will be of no value without fraternity or 
liberty. It seems that the three can coexist only if one follows the way 
of the Buddha. Communism can give one but not all. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


463 


PART V 


Schemes of 
Books 


The scheme of ‘What the Brahmins have 
done to the Hindus ?’ is in printed form. 
All other schemes are typed. — Editors. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\vo!3-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


464 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


465 


CHAPTER 19 
Schemes of Books 

No. I 

REVOLUTION AND COUNTER-REVOLUTION 
IN ANCIENT INDIA 



Table of Contents 

Book I 

The Age of Racial Conflict 

Book II 

The Conflict over Inequality 

Book III 

How Conflict lead to Revolution 

Book IV 

Results of Revolution 

Book V 

The Birth of Counter-Revolution 

Book VI 

Results of Counter-Revolution 

Book VII 

The Present Age is the Age of Counter-Revolution. 

BOOK— I 

Part I 

The Age of Social Conflict 

Chapter 1 

The Indo Iranians 

Chapter 2 

The Aryans v/s Nagas 

Chapter 3 

The Aryans v/s Brahamins 

Chapter 4 

The Attempt to Reconciliation. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


466 


466 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 



BOOK— II 

The Rise of Inequality 

Chapter 1 

Rise of Brahamandom 

Chapter 2 

Infallibility of the Vedas 

Chapter 3 

Graded inequality the Essence of Chaturvarna 

Chapter 4 

The Shudra under graded Inequality. 

BOOK— III 

Part I 

The Revolution and Its Principles 

Chapter 1 

The Rise of Buddhism as a Revolutionary Force 

Chapter 2 

Equality as the Principle of the Revolution 

Chapter 3 

Reason and not Faith 

Chapter 4 

Freedom of Thought 

Part II 

Effects of Revolution on Society 

Chapter 1 

Social effects of the Revolution 

Chapter 2 

Political effects of the Revolution 

Chapter 3 

Elevation of Woman 

Part III 

Political effects of the Revolution 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


467 


SCHEMES OF BOOKS 467 



BOOK— IV 

Part I 

Causes of Counter-Revolution 

Chapter 1 

Regicide or the Birth of Counter-Revolution 

Chapter 2 

Manu Smriti or the Gospel of Counter-Revolution 

Part II 

The Social Effects of Counter-Revolution 

Chapter 1 

The Deification of the Brahamin 

Chapter 2 

The Installation of the Brahamins as Rulers 

Chapter 3 

The Suppression of the Shudras 

Chapter 4 

The Degradation of Women 

Part III 
Chapter 1 
Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 
Chapter 4 

The Struggle between Revolution and Counter-Revolution 

Part IV 

Chapter 1 
Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 
Chapter 4 

Social Effects of Revolution 

Part V 

Chapter 1 
Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 
Chapter 4 

The Triumph of Counter-Revolution 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


468 


468 dr. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 


Part VI 

Chapter 1 
Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 
Chapter 4 

The Present Age is the Age of 
Counter-Revolution 

Part VII 

Chapter 1 
Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 
Chapter 4 

Constitution of Counter-Revolution 


No. 2 

WHAT THE BRAHMINS HAVE DONE TO THE HINDUS 


Part I 

The Making of the Hindu Society 

Chapter 1 
Chapter 2 
Chapter 3 

The Growth of Hindu Religion 
Hinduism And Its Symbols 
The Rock on which it is Built 

Part II 

The Riddles of Hinduism 

Chapter 4 
Chapter 5 

The Supremacy of the Brahmin 
The Fall of the Shudra 

Chapter 6 
Chapter 7 
Chapter 8 

The Degradation of Woman 
Beef- Eating v/s Vegetarianism 
Vedas v/s Vedanta 

Chapter 9 

Rise of Shiva and Vishnu 

Chapter 10 
Chapter 11 

Worship of Rama and Krishna 
Bhagvat Gita — Peace for War 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


469 



SCHEMES OF BOOKS 469 

Part III 

The Holy Brahmin Empire 

Chapter 12 
Chapter 13 
Chapter 14 
Chapter 15 

The Brahminic Revolution 

The Causes of the Revolution 

Manu the Philosopher of the Revolution 

The Political and Social Philosophy of the Brahamanic 
Revolution 

Chapter 16 

Brahamanic Rule in Action 

Patr IV 

Hinduism and the Legacy of Brahmanism 

Chapter 17 
Chapter 18 
Chapter 19 
Chapter 20 
Chapter 21 
Chapter 22 
Chapter 23 

The Disease of Graded Inequality 
The Debasement of Man 
The Degradation of Religion 
The Darkening of the Mind 
The Deadening of Conscience 
The Depreciation of Life 
The Death Knell of Democracy 

Part V 

Brahmnism and Modern India 

Chapter 24 
Chapter 25 
Chapter 26 

Brahmins and Administration 
Brahmins and Politics 
Brahmins and Labour 

Part VI 

Brahmins v/s Hindus 

Chapter 27 
Chapter 28 
Chapter 29 

What Ails the Hindus 
The British and Brahmins 
The Remedy for the Disease 


Note : — This scheme is found in print. Rest of the schemes are in typed form 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


470 


470 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

NO. 3 

CAN I BE A HINDU? 

SYMBOLS OF HINDUISM 

1. Symbols represent the Soul of a Thing 

2. Symbols of Christianity 

3. Symbols of Islam 

4. Symbols of Jainism 

5. Symbols of Buddhism 

6. What is Hinduism; 

Undefinable something 

7. What are the Symbols of Hinduism 
Three 

(1) Caste 

(2) Cults 

(1) Rama 

(2) Krishna 

(3) Shiva 

(4) Vishnu 


(3) Service of Superman 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


471 


SCHEMES OF BOOKS 471 


NO. 4 

INDIA AND COMMUNISM 


Part I 

The Pre-Requisites of Communism 

Chapter 1 

The Birth-place of Communism 

Chapter 2 

Communism and Democracy 

Chapter 3 

Communism and Social Order 

Part II 

India and the Pre-Requisites of Communism 

Chapter 4 

The Hindu Social Order 

Chapter 5 

The Basis of the Hindu Social Order 

Chapter 6 

Impediments to Communism arising 
from the Social Order 

Part III 

What then shall we do ? 

I 

Marx and the European Social Order 

II 

Manu and the Hindu Social Order 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


472 


472 DR. BABASAHEB AMBEDKAR : WRITINGS AND SPEECHES 

NO. 5 

ESSAYS ON THE BHAGVAT GITA 

Table of Contents 


Essay I 

What made Arjun agree to fight ? 

(1) 

Was it because Krishna met his objections? 
or 

(2) 

Because of the command of Krishna 

Essay II 

What does the Bhagvat Gita teach ? 

(1) 

Does it teach Sankhyayog ? 

(2) 

Does it teach Dnyanyoga ? 

(3) 

Does it teach Karmayoga ? 

(4) 

Does it teach Bhaktiyoga ? 

(5) 

Conclusion 

Essay III 

Was Gita a part of the original Mahabharat 

(1) 

Gita and the Udyoga Parva 

(2) 

The first mention of Gita in the stream of 
Sanskrit Literature 

(3) 

When was the Bhagvat Gita written ? 

Essay IV 

Why was the Bhagvat Gita written ? 

(1) 

Was the necessity Social ? 

(2) 

Was the necessity Religious ? 

Essay V 

Gita and Buddhism 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 

feT 


cu- 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 

3- 34-u^u. 

H 


472A 


473 



Specimen of Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar’s handwriting in pencil from the pages 
entitled ‘Can I be a Hindu’ and ‘Symbols of Hinduism’. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


474 


472A 





') 


'i— . ^ 

Aa *jgK EsSjT'T 

j. ^ ^ .^* 7 ’ 

/Ca^ ^ f*~ - >«W— 

&y~ h^ 4 - yt^r*. t^oCS tL~ S*-* - 

S^JL -j^ ^ - /W f^- 

3 JW ^ 4c ?«^u*r** -■**- '*^J**ih_^L 


yr>~^ < 2*0 ^ r<x~*U*y-*^ o 

t. ‘‘^ r ^ ' **Z "^2a 

xZlf *=> , “* 

~ V* — - >w **r vr 


-«HA. 


1Vv4- 


*-<*«*£) _ TL^Ur^ <*^ 

ijv »*' *^ 4 Xw OvjA' 

<41^ o~ - 3ff{n T~ 

^0 CW C»ftuL2 Quu^'ge^ - 

\ V7_ m /h 


2 &v*. ^AvA- -**) 

6 . K - - ■' - - 


' — ^ VMt. ■■'I 

w . * -~W ■■ ■ » Sw SS.Ctrvu^J*^. 

*^yvvC^<L l \\<y^Aj,Jr- s^ • J/c_ 

■S<i^<) ^-dt^L |^CcXj»^CflL « 


Crrx-o 


Facsimile of a page from the notes on Virat Parva in Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar’s 
handwriting and the title page of his intended scheme on Bhagvat Gita. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-04.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


472A 


475 


B. R. AMBEDKAR, 

M.A., Ph.D., D.Sc., LL.D., D.Litt., Barristcr-at-Law, 
Member, Council of Stales. 


26, ALIPORE ROAD, 
CIVIL LINES, 
DELHI n 

Dated the 12th~ June^ -1956. 


My dear Rego, 

I have returned the Marathi Edition of the Mahat at • 
It seems that along with your copies my edition has also been 
taken away. .Will you kindly send me the Marathi translation 
of the Adi Parwar by registered pest. My work on the Revo- 
lution and Counter Revolution 'has been held up. Treat this 
as most urgent. 

Yours sincerely, 

(B.R. Ambedkar) 

Shri S. Rege, 

Librarian, 

Siddharth College, 

Bombay . 


Facsimile of a letter by Dr. Babasaheb Ambedkar to Mr. S. S. Rege, showing 
that his work on Revolution and Counter-Revolution was in progress in June 1956. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\vo!3-04.indd 


MK 


SJ+YS 


28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


476 


472A 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


473 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 

The books and journals listed here include the works cited by the 
author. The details about the publications have been searched out from 
the Bombay University Library. Still details of some of the books could 
not be had before the release of this Volume. 

Adams, D. S. : Theology (Hastings Encyclopaedia of Religion and Ethics, 
Vol. XII). 

Adelphi : The Nemesis of Ineffective Religion (1941). 

Altekar, Anant Sadashiv : Sources of Hindu Dharma in its Socio -religious 
aspect (Pub. Sholapur Institute of Public Administration). Name of the 
article: The Position of Smritis as a Source of Dharma — Kane Memorial 
Volume. 

Ambedkar, Dr. B. R.: Annihilation of Castes (New Book Co., Bombay 1936). 

— Castes in India (Indian Antiquary, Vol. XLVI, 1917, pp. 81-95). 

— Who were the Shudras? (Thacker & Co., Rampart Row, Bombay 1, 1st 
Ed., 1946). 

First two of these books are included in Vol. 1 of the present series. 
Third one will be out in due course. 

Baines, Sir J. A. : Census of India Report (1881). 

Boudhayana : Grihya Sutras. 

Beard: Freedom in Political Thought (in ‘Freedom — Its Meaning’, Ed. by 
Ruth Nanda Kishan). 

Belvalkar, Shripad Krishna : Vedant Philosophy (Basu-Mallik Lectures- 
University of Calcutta); (Poona, 1929, 1st part). 

Bergson : Two Sources of Morality. 

Bhandarkar, Sir Ramkrishna Gopal : Vaishnavism, Saivism and Minor 
Religious Systems (Encyclopaedia of Indo-Aryan Research) (Stransburg, 
Karl J. Trubner 1913). 

Bhattacharya, Jogendra Nath : Hindu Castes and Sects (Calcutta, Thacker 
Spink & Co., 1896). 

Bloomfield Maurice : The Religion of the Veda : The Ancient Religion of 
India (New York. G. P. Putnam’s Sons, 1908). 

Blunt, E. A. H. : The Caste System of Northern India : With Special reference 
to the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh (London, Humphrey Nilford. 
1931). 

Burnouf : L’lntroduction a L’Historie on Buddhisme Indien. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


474 


474 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Bohtlingk : Introduction to Bhagvat Gita (Indian Antiquary, 1908. Supplement). 
Boudhayana : Grihya Sutras. 

Budhiraja, S. D. : Bhagvat Gita. 

Crawley : Tree of Life. 

Crawley & Tufts : Evolution and Ethics. 

Daftari, Keshao Laxman : Dharmarahasya. 

Date, Yashwant Ramkrishna : Swadhyaya, Magazine (1st Year, Double 
Number). 

Dewey, John : Democracy and Education (New York, Macmillan, 1916). 
Donald, A. Mackenzie : Buddhism in Pre-Christian Britain (London, Blackie 
& Son, 1928). 

Eggeling, Julius : Satpatha Brahmana — Part I to V (London Sacred Books 
of the East Series, Oxford 1885). 

Encyclopaedia Britannica : 11th Ed., Vol. XXVI. 

Fausboll, V. : Indian Mythology. 

Gait, Sir Edward : Census of India Report (1911.) 

Garbe, Richards : Introduction to the Bhagvadgita, Tr. by D. Mackichen, 
(Bombay, University of Bombay, 1918). 

Hamilton : A New Account of the East Indies (1744). 

Hazara : Chronology of Puranas. 

Hopkins, E. Washburn : The Great Epic of India (New York, Charles Scribner’s 
Son, 1901). 

— History of the Religion (New York, the Macmillan Co., 1916). 

— The Religions of India. 

— History of the Ruling Races. 

Huxley, Tomas H. : Evolution and Ethics (London, Macmillan and Co. 1903). 
Ibbetson Denzil, Punjab Census Report 1881 (Lahore, Govt, of Punjab 1881). 

— Punjab Castes (Lahore, Govt, of Punjab 1916). 

Innes, C. A. : Gazetter of Malabar and Anjengo District (Vol. I). 

Jacks: Morals and Religion (Hibbert Journal Vol. XIX). 

Jacobi: The dates of the Philosophical Sutras of the Brahamanas (The Journal 
of the American Oriental Society, Vol. XXXI, 1911). 

Jaiswal : Manu and Yajnavalkya. 

— Hindu Polity. 

Kale, Tryambak Gurunath: Purana Nirikshana (Marathi) (Panvel). 

Kane, Pandurang Vaman: A brief Sketch of the Purva Mimansa System 
(Bombay 1924). 

— History of Dharma Shastra. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


475 


BIBLIOGRAPHY 475 

Kern H. : Manual of Indian Buddhism (Stransburg 1896). 

Kosambi, Dharmanand : Hindi Sanskriti Ani Ahimsa (Marathi) 
(Bombay, Author, 1935). 

Laski, Harold J. : Liberty in the Modern State (London, George Allen and 
Unwin Ltd. 1930). 

Laws A. C. : Natural Theology. 

Lyall Sir Alfred: Asiatic Studies — Religion and Society (London, John Murray, 
1907). 

Maine, Henry James: Ancient Law (London, J. M. Dent and Sons, 1861). 
Maritain Jacques: The Conquest of Freedom in ‘Freedom — its Meaning’ by 
Ruth Nanda Kishan). 

Max Muller : Science and Religion (Royal Institution, 1870) (London Longmans 
Green and Co., 1882). 

— Lecture on the Growth of Religion, Hibbert Lectures 1878 (London, 1878); 
— Mahaparinibbana Sutta; 

— Ancient Sanskrit Literature, 1860. 

Medhatithi : Commentary on Manu, Edited by Vishwanath Narayan Mandlik 
(Bombay 1886). 

Mill, J. S. : Utilitarianism and Liberty, Representative Govt. (London 1954). 
Modern Review (July 1912). 

Moore, Edward : Hindu Pantheon (London, 1st Ed. by W. 0. Simpson, 1810); 
— Hindu Infanticide (London 1911). 

Muir : White Yajurveda (Original Sanskrit Texts, London, Trubner & Co., 
57 & 59 Ludgate Hill, 1873 2nd Ed.) 

Nicolas, M.P. : From Nietzsche down to Hitler (London, William Hodge & 
Co., 1938). 

Nietzsche, F. W. : Anti Christ, Tr. from the German by H. L. Mencker 
(Torrance, The Noontide Press, 1880). 

THUS Spake Zarathustra Translated by Thomas Common (New York, 
Macmillan Co 1905) 

Partigar : Ancient Indian Historical Tradition. 

Plowman Max : The Nemesis of Ineffectual Religion (Adelphi 1941). 

Pratt : Buddhism. 

Pradnaneshwar Yati : Chaturvarnya; 

— Upanayan. Pringle Pattison : Philosophy of Religion. 

Studies in Philosophy of Religion (Oxford, Munro’s Encyclopaedia of Education, 
1930). 

Radhakrishnan, Sarvapalli : Indian Philosophy, Vol. I and II (New 
York, Macmillan, 1923). 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


476 


476 BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Rajwade, V. K. : Article on Bhagvat Gita (Bhandarkar Memorial Volume). 

Rhys, Davids T. W. : Buddhism, Society for promoting Christain Knowledge 
(London, Northumberland Avenue W. C. 1886). 

Ryakan Kimura : A Historical Study of the Terms — Hinayana and Mahayana, 
and the Origin of Mahayana Buddhism (Calcutta University 1927). 

Sarkar, B. K. : The Positive Background of Hindu Sociology. 

Satavalekar, M. D. : Purushartha, Vol. XIII. 

Seal, Brajendranath : The Positive Sciences of the Ancient Hindus. 

Sen, Surendra Nath : Early Career of Kanhoji Angria and other papers. 
Sham Shastri : Memorial Volumes. 

— Kautilya’s Arthashastra. 

Shankaracharya : Opposition to Krishnaism. 

Shastri, Harprasad : Memorial Volume (Ed. Narendra Nath Law, 

— Buddhistic Studies, Ed. B. C, Law. 

Smith Robertson : The Religion of the Semites (1927.) 

Smith, Vincent A : Early History of India (Oxford, 1924). 

Stefens : Commentary on the Law of England (15th Ed. Vol. IV). 

Taylor A. E. : The Faith of a Moralist Gifford Lectures, 1926-27 (London 1930). 
Telang, K. T. : Bhagvat Gita (Ed. F Max Muller, Oxford, 1882). 

Tilak, B. G. : Gita Rahasya (English Translation). 

Travels of (1) Alberuni, (2) Duarte Barbosa, (3) Megasthenes. 

Utgikar, N. B. : Garbe’s Introduction to the Bhagvat Gita (Tr. from the 
German, Bombay 1918). 

Vaidya, C. V. : History of Medieval Hindu India, in 3 vols. (Poona, 1921). 

— Riddle of the Ramayana: Bombay, Radhabai Atmaram Sagoon, 1906). 
Varthema, Ludovico Di: Travels of (Hakyt Society). 

Vireshwarananda Swami : Brahma Sutras (Advaita Ashram, 1936). 

Weber Albrecht : History of Indian Literature, Tr. by John Mann and Theodor 
Zacharae (London, Kegan Paul, Trubner and Co. Ltd., 1878, 1892). 

William Jackson, A. V. : History of India Vol. II (London 1906.) 

Wilson : Essays on Sanskrit Literature, Vol. III. 

Winternitz : History of Indian Literature (English Translation). 

Other Books: Aitareya Brahmana, Nirukta, Narada Smriti,Mahabharata, 
Ramayana, Bhagvat Gita, Harivamsha, Yajnavalkya Smriti, Mitakshara. 


• •• 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013 


477 


INDEX 


Abhimanyu : 384 
Acton, Lord : 66 
Adams, D. S.: 8 
Adhitthana : 449. 

Adhvaryu : 253. 

Adiparva : 171, 373-74, 393, 408. 

Adityas :413. 

Afghans : 167, 236, 273. 

Afghanistan : 230. 

Agastya, Rishi: 52, 395, 413. 

Ageres: 139. 

Aginapaveni: 159, 181. 

Agni, God : 58, 161, 183, 395, 404. 
Agnihotra: 258. 

Agnihotri: 133, 234 
Agni Purana: 256. 

Agnyatavasa: 381, 382. 

Ahalya : 394. 

Ahimsa : 441, 450-51. 

Ahirs:104. 

Aitareya Brahmana : 234. 

Ajayadeva : 238. 

Ajinkya (Draupadi’s son) : 384, 
Akshamala : 291. 

Alberuni : 132, 134, 141. 

Allauddin-Khilji: 232. 

Altekar :78, 79. 

Amarkosh : 242, 252. 

Ambalatthika Pleasance: 195, 

Ambarisha, King : 57-58, 404-05. 
Ambattha : 204-20. 

Ambattha Sutta : 204-20. 

America : 453 
Amrosia : 403. 

Ananda : 446, 452. 

Anandpal: 231. 

Anarchy : 460. 

Anaryas (Non-Aryans) : 176, 267, 276. 
Anathapindaka : 460. 

Anatole France : 85. 

Andhaka (Kingdom) : 385. 

Andhras: 274-75. 

Andhra Dynasty : 240, 244. 

Anga King : 48, 63, 392, 426. 

Angiras : 50, 56, 125, 216, 356, 393, 413. 
Anguttara Nikaya : 187. 

Anhilwad: 231. 

Annam: 229. 

Anti Christ : 75, 116. 


Anrut Desh: 384. 

Anu-Gita : 373. 

Anuloma: 307-08, 319. 

Anupataka: 83. 

Anushasan Parva : 373, 410-411. 
Apastamba-Dharma Sutra : 234, 356. 
Apollo:333. 

Arabs: 236,273. 

Aranyakas : 246-47. 

Arhat: 177,204-05,222-23, 225, 227. 

Arians : 333. 

Aristotle : 86, 333. 

Arjuna: 62-63, 154, 169, 246. 262-65, 359, 
361, 376-78, 382, 384, 386-90, 410-14,472. 
Arthashastra : 421,424,433-36. 

Aryans: 150, 153-58, 165, 167-76, 186. 
220-22, 231, 235, 251, 267, 276, 321-22, 
418-28,465. 

Arya-Samajists ; 78. 

Aryavarta: 155, 169. 

Asavas : 202, 448. 

Ashoka, the Great: 237, 268, 423, 459. 
Ashramas : 32, 34, 35. 

Ashtanga Marg : 445. 

Ashvalayana Grihya Sutra : 156, 172, 248. 
Ashvalayana Kalpa Sutra : 234. 
Ashvamedha Yadna : 157,173,269,424. 
Ashwatthama : 382-83. 

Ashwins : 413, 418, 424. 

Ashtadhyayi: 432. 

Asia: 167. 

Asita, Rishi : 307. 

Assyria: 14. 

Asuras : 51,151-52,154, 169, 176, 394, 409, 
413,418-19,426. 

Atharvan, Rishi: 125, 356. 

Atharva Samhita : 234. 

Atharva Veda: 253, 432. 

Atheists: 303. 

Atipataka: 83. 

Ati Shudras : 7, 5, 25-26, 37, 107-08. 
Atman : 85, 86. 

Atri, Rishi: 48, 49, 292, 393,413-14. 
Atreyi(Race) : 392. 

Aurva: 61, 408-09, 413. 

Avabhritya : 191. 

Avadan: 156, 172. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


478 


INDEX 


478 

Ayodhya :57, 399, 404. 

Ayonija: 156,172. 

Babylonian : 16. 

Bactria: 230. 

Badarayan : 234, 247-49, 257, 259, 261, 363, 
367, 378-79. 

Badari, Rishi: 423. 

Baines, J. A. : 335. 

Baladitya: 240, 244-45. 

Balakhilyas : 50. 

Balaram: 384, 390. 

Balfour: 77. 

Ballava: 382. 

Balperazim: 14. 

Barbosa, Duarte : 134, 136. 

Bana, the poet: 276. 

Baneas, Merchants (Baniyas): 102, 134, 135 
Barthalomeu : 277. 

Baudhayana : 79, 433. 

Beard, Prof. : 96. 

Bebel: 85. 

Behar Sheriff: 237. 

Belvalkar, Prof.: 257. 

Benaras : 233, 401, 409, 422. 

Bengal: 231, 237, 243, 252, 295. 

Beowulf: 85. 

Bergson, Prof.: 25, 321, 

Betunes, Merchants : 140. 

Bhagadatta : 385 

Bhagvat Gita: 78, 80, 81, 127-28, 150, 239-40, 
244-46, 257, 261-65, 357-80, 468, 472. 
Bhagvat Purana : 248, 256. 

Bhagvat, Rajaram Shashtri : 246 
Bbakti Marg : 264, 360, 376, 472. 
Bhandarkar, Sir R. G. : 231, 235. 

Bhangis : 103. 

Bharata, King : 128, 264. 

Bhargava Rishi: 408-09. 

Bhatias: 65. 

Bhattacharya, Mr. : 142. 

Bhavishya Purana : 253, 256. 

Bhesika, the Barber : 223. 

Bhikkuni Sangha : 452. 

Bhikkus : 232-35, 242, 251, 309-10, 322, 
446, 452-53 
Bhima : 388. 

Bhishma : 157, 173, 307, 377, 381-83, 385-90. 
Bhishma Parva: 261. 

Bhu-Devas : 325, 328. 

Bhrigu Rishi: 57, 60-61, 63, 216, 270, 292, 
329. 404, 408-09. 

Biabares: 138. 


Bible : 15, 75, 116, 357, 360. 

Bihar: 232-33, 267. 

Bimbisar, the King : 195, 267. 

Bismark :331. 

Blake, Mr. : 87. 

Black Yagush : 234. 

Bloomfield, Prof.: 266. 

Blunt, Mr.: 102-03, 105. 

Bodhisatta: 188. 

Bodhi Tree : 237. 

Bohtlingk Mr. : 357. 

Bolshevism: 128. 

Bombay : 146, 234, 243, 252, 324. 

Bonda Porajas : 89. 

Borgese Pope : 325. 

Boudhayana: 79, 356. 

Brahanaradiya : 256. 

Brahannada : 382. 

Brahaspati: 51-52, 154, 169, 294-95, 394-95. 

Brahma : 28, 33, 50, 52, 54-55, 58-59, 85-86, 
108, 123, 155, 171, 191, 255, 272, 278, 280, 
337, 348, 351, 358, 386, 395-96, 398, 404, 
419, 427. 

Brahmacharya : 101, 123, 432. 

Brahmadatta : 176-77. 

Brahma Jal Sutta : 176. 

Brahmanas (Texts): 246-47, 395-96. 

Brahma-Purana : 256. 

Brahma Nirvana : 369. 

Brahmanda-Purana : 253, 256. 

Brahma-Surra Bhashya : 240, 245, 247, 257. 

Brahma Sutras : 363, 367, 375. 

Brahma Vaivarta Purana : 256. 

Brahminism : 150, 154, 220, 230, 232-40, 266-71, 
273-75, 277, 280, 282, 285-95, 301, 304, 
306-08, 313-17, 320-24, 326-28, 368,431,465. 

Brahmins : 7, 25-28, 30-32, 36-43, 45-56, 59-65, 
68-83, 99-102, 104-10, 112-13 118-24, 
127,132-33, 135-36, 13W1, 147, 150, 154-55, 
158-63, 166-69, 173-76 179-85, 189-223, 
225-28, 231, 233-38, 242, 246, 248, 251, 
255-57, 261, 263-64, 266, 268-69, 272-86, 
289-91, 303-13, 316-20, 322-31, 335-56, 
363, 378-79, 381, 392-93, 396-98, 400, 403, 
408-15, 416-18, 421-25, 431, 435, 445, 467-69 

Addicted to: 

(а) Adorning : 160, 181. 

(б) Couches : 159, 181. 

(c) Earning by wrong means : 160-64, 
182-86. 

(d) Low conversation : 160, 181. 

(e) Recreation : 169, 180. 

(/) Visiting shows : 158, 180. 

( g ) Wrangling phrases : 160, 182. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


479 


INDEX 


479 


Course of Conduct; 281. 

Dakshina to : 282-83. 

Disabilities : 280-81. 

Exemption of: 

Punishments : 118-19, 279. 

Monopolies : 278. 

Penances: 284. 

Privileges : 119, 279. 

Rights of: 

To Fees : 282-83. 

To Rebellion: 276-77. 

Tax : 278. 

Status — Above Law : 118. 

Supremacy of: 72, 76-77, 117-18. 

Briex (Author): 85. 

Britain : 167. 

Buddha Lord: 152, 153, 165-68, 176-78, 182-88, 
195-96, 200-30 233, 322-23, 325, 328, 363, 
367-68, 371, 379, 441-42, 444-53. 459-61. 
Buddha Gaya : 237. 

Buddhism: 149-50, 153, 167, 186-87, 227-38, 
239, 244, 249, 251, 257, 266-67, 269-75, 
290-91, 294-95, 303, 309-10, 315-17, 323, 
335, 363-71, 379, 432, 460-61, 466, 470-72. 
Buddhists : 152, 167,171, 175,187, 230-31, 
233-38, 242, 251, 257, 268-75, 291, 309-10, 
313, 315-16, 322, 336, 368-69, 374, 376, 380. 
Buddhist Church ( See Sangha). 

Buddhist Councils : 379. 

Buddhist Literature : 248, 252. 

Buddhist Monasteries : 232. 

Buddhist Universities : 232. 

Buddhi Yoga: 362. 

Buddhology: 379-80. 

Bundelkhand : 231. 

Burke Edmond : 453. 

Burma: 229. 

Calicut: 136. 

Cambridge : 335. 

Canaquas : 139. 

Carlyie : 462. 

Carthaginians : 14. 

Caste : 45-46, 49, 68, 80, 102-06, 141-43, 145-47, 
266, 275, 285-86, 289-90, 295-301, 303-08, 
318, 326, 334-36, 368, 420-22. 
Caste-System : 25-26, 37-38, 45, 67-68, 102, 
147, 204, 220. 

Causation, law of : 442,446. 

Celestial wheel: 454-56. 

Ceylon : 229. 

Chachnama : 236. 

Chaitya : 242, 251-52. 


Chaldeans : 16. 

Chalukyas : 231. 

Chandala : 37, 55-56, 114, 133, 170, 402-03. 
Chandragupta Maurya : 130, 268, 372-73. 
Charvakas : 368. 

Chaturvarnya : 67, 69-71, 80-81, 277, 291, 
321-22, 326-28, 356, 361-65, 386, 426, 466. 
Chauhans : 231. 

Chawdas : 231. 

Chedi: 231. 

Chemosh : 14-15. 

Chenchus (a tribe) : 89. 

Chhandogya Upanishad : 423. 

China : 229. 

Chinese-Turkastan : 229. 

Chitpavan Brahmin : 65. 

Chitrasen : 382. 

Cholas : 231. 

Christ, Jesus : 97. 

Christians : 76, 100, 128, 303-04, 335. 
Christians, Roman Catholics : 32. 
Christianity : 7, 75-76, 116-17, 142, 304, 
335, 357, 460, 470. 

Church : 136. 

Church Discipline Act : 290. 

Church of England : 290. 

Chyavana Rishi : 413-14, 424. 

Civil Liberty : 98. 

Civil Theology : 5. 

Class Conflict: 444. 

Class-System : 305-06. 

Class-war : 64. 

Commandments : 18. 

Communism : 443-44, 447, 450, 460-62, 471. 
Communists : 450-52, 459-60. 

Comte : 86. 

Coomarswami, A. K. : 300. 

Constantine : 303. 

Coparnican Revolution : 9. 

Crawley, Prof. : 11, 24, 82. 

Cretaus : 333. 

Criminal Tribes : 90, 92. 

Cuiavem Caste : 138. 

Dahir the King : 231, 236. 

Daityas : 413, 419. 

Daksha Prajapati : 155, 171, 419. 

Dalmu : 103. 

Dam : 157, 173. 

Damayanti : 154, 168. 

Danavas : 413, 419. 

Daphtary. K. L. : 286 (Fn). 

Darshanas, Six : 86. 

Daradas (Region) : 63. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


480 


INDEX 


480 


Darwin : 9. 

Das Capital : 444. 

Dasyus : 176, 419-21. 

Date, Y. R. : 82(Fn). 

Dattatreya: 61, 411. 

Dauhitra : 155, 171. 

David : 14. 

Deccan : 209, 231. 

Democracy : 128, 459. 

Demon-Mada : 414. 

Deshastha Brahman : 65. 

Devas : 151-52, 156-57, 172, 189-90, 413-14. 
Devadatta : 28, 109, 167, 351. 

Devagiri: 232. 

Devayani: 291, 307. 

Devodas: 422. 

Dewey, Prof. John : 306, 451. 

Dhahaprachetani : 155,171. 

Dhamma : 166, 226, 371, 445, 447, 449, 452, 461. 
Dhammapada : 360. 

Dharmaraj : 82, 154, 168-69, 171, 375. 

Dharma Shastra : 78-79. 

Dhar State : 231. 

Dhivaras : 49, 393. 

Dhritarashtra : 246, 261-62, 385-90. 

Dhyana : 235. 

Dibbasota: 213. 

Dibbakakkhu(Divyachakshu): 213, 389. 
Dictatorship : 451-53, 459, 461, 471. 

Diodorus Siculus : 333. 

Diti:419. 

Dirghatapa : 156. 

Dnanakanda : 247-48. 

Dnyanyog : 472. 

Dnyana Marga : 264, 360, 362. 

Domba : 133. 

Donald, Dr. : 167. 

Draupadi: 154, 156, 169, 172, 382, 384, 388-89. 
Dridhanetra: 55. 

Drona : 381-83, 387, 389-90, 377. 

Dronaparvan : 63. 

Drupad : 384-85. 

Durmukha: 382. 

Duryodhana : 263, 375, 381-91. 

Dushala (Warrior) : 382, 

Dushasana : 381-82, 389. 

Dushtadyumna (Draupadi’s son) : 384. 

Dutta, R. C.: 68. 

Dwarka : 384-85. 

Edom: 15, 16. 

Edomites : 16. 

Edukas : 251-52, 374. 

Eggeling : 330. 


Egypt: 128. 

Egyptian : 321, 333. 

Europe : 70. 

Europeans : 147, 304. 

Equality, Philosophy of : 25, 37. 

Ezekiel : 99. 

Farahabad: 89. 

Fatikpur: 102. 

Feudalism: 128. 

Fraternity, Philosophy of: 44, 46. 

French : 95, 153. 

French Court: 25. 

French Revolution : 21 462. 

Gadhi, King : 54, 62, 396-97, 409. 

Gait, Sir Edward 335. 

Galava, Rishi: 156, 172. 

Ganesh : 255, 400. 

Gana; 151. 

Gandhar : 230. 

Gandhari : 387, 389. 

Gandharvas : 50, 151, 418. 

Gandhi M. K. : 124. 

Ganga : 232, 291, 307, 403. 

Garbe, Prof. Richards : 240,244-46, 357-58, 
366, 376. 

Gargi : 259, 432. 

Garuda: 256. 

Gautama, Smriti: 43, 79, 122, 396. 

Gautam Utathya: 292. 

Gayatri Mantra : 32, 33, 62, 234, 348-49. 
Ghori Mohammad : 231. 

Ghori Shahabuddin : 231. 

Giddings : 85. 

Gita Rahasya : 244, 360. 

Goraksya : 127. 

Gotam, the Buddha : see Buddha 
Government — 

Parliamentary : 452. 

By force : 453. 

By Moral Disposition ; 453. 

Graded Inequality : 320, 326. 
Grahasthashram : 123. 

Granthik (Nakul): 328. 

Greek : 5, 15, 97, 130. 

Greece : 15, 128. 

Grihya Sutras : 248, 373, 433. 

Grimm’s Fairy Tale : 148. 

Gujaras : 104. 

Gujarat: 134, 233, 238. 

Gulohits: 231. 

Gupta, kings : 237, 378. 

Gupta Dynasty : 240, 244-45. 

Gurukul: 432. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


481 


INDEX 


Haeckel : 85-86. 

Hadi (People) : 133. 

Haihaya Kshatriyas : 408-12, 

Hamilton : 324. 

Hardayal, Lata : 85. 

Havishyanda : 55. 

Harishchandra : 400-03. 

Harivamsa : 57,171, 392, 399. 

Harrison, Frederic : 85. 

Harsha : 237. 

Hastinapur : 388. 

Hazara Mr. : 255. 

Hebraism : 33.5 
Herbert Spencer : 23. 

Hermes : 333. 

Hestia Goddess : 333. 

Himalayas : 51, 59, 61, 207, 394, 397, 408. 
Himachal Pradesh : 151. 

Hinayan Buddhism : 371, 379. 

Hindi : 233. 

Hindu Religion : see Hinduism 
Hindus : 7, 8, 22-24, 31, 32, 37-38, 42, 48, 
64-68, 70, 74-75, 78-84, 86, 90, 92, 95, 
100-107, 110-20, 123-24, 127-30, 132-34, 
141-48,152, 157, 165, 172, 229-30, 236, 
239, 244, 255, 270, 273-74, 285, 299, 305, 
308, 314, 316, 320-23, 326, 328-29, 332, 
336-37, 357, 366, 369, 392, 430, 469, 471. 
Hinduism : 3, 5, 7, 8, 22, 24, 31, 34, 36-38, 
42-44, 39-41, 46, 64-67, 71-72, 74, 77-82, 
84, 86-87, 92, 132, 141-44, 231, 234, 
236-38, 242-44, 270, 274, 305, 334-36, 
357, 468, 470. 

(a) Equality in : 25-37. 

(b) Ethics in : 71-87. 

(c) Fraterity in : 44-66. 

(d) Liberty in : 38-44. 

(e) Utility of : 66-71. 

Hiranvati river : 391. 

Hiranyakashyapu : 426. 

Hitler, Adolf : 75, 322. 

Hobbes : 279. 

Hollius : 90. 

Holy Trinity : 136. 

Hopkins Prof. : 167, 241, 244-46, 252, 253, 
331, 357, 372-73. 

Holtzman : 358. 

Hoyasalas : 232. 

Huen Tsang : 231. 

Huns : 237, 242, 251. 

Humboldt : 246. 

Huxley, Edward : 85. 


481 

Ibbetson, Sir Denzil : 142, 335. 

Ibne Kasim : 231, 243, 252. 

Iddhi : 213. 

Ikkhanankala wood : 204-05, 218. 
Ikshwaku : 57, 396, 398, 405, 410. 

Ila : 50, 155,171, 393. 

India : 7, 70, 85-86, 102, 104-05 (fn.), 145, 
151, 229, 231, 232, 236-38, 266-67, 270, 
273, 275, 308-09, 323-26, 335, 363, 372, 
420. 

Indo-China : 229-30. 

Indra: 50-52, 56-59, 63, 176, 393-95, 404-05, 
413-14, 419-20, 424, 427. 

Indraprastha : 385-86. 

Indrani : 50-51, 394-96. 

Inter-dining : 204, 292-93, 301, 304, 307, 327. 
Inter-marriage : 204, 292-93, 301, 304, 306, 
327. 

Islam : 7, 142, 229-30, 233, 236, 274, 335, 470. 
Israel : 14, 17. 

Israelites : 128. 

Jacob : 16. 

Jacobi, Prof: 378. 

Jacks, Prof.: 333, 34. 

Jaimini: 234, 241, 247, 250, 257-59, 261, 334, 
362-67, 378-80, 423. 

Jainism : 238, 275, 335, 451, 470. 

Jaiswala : 102-03. 

Jamadagni : 62-63, 389, 410, 412. 
Janaka-King : 258-59,432. 

Janapada : 421. 

Janasruti : 423. 

Janhavi : 155, 171. 

Japan : 229. 

Jaratkari : 291, 307 
Jaratkaru : 291, 307. 

Jataka : 132. 

Jatibhramsakara : 83. 

Jaya : 248 50, 378. 

Jayapala: 231. 

Jehovah : 14, 17, 99. 

Jeremiah : 15. 

Jewish : 75, 116. 

Jews : 97,127, 333. 

Judaism : 7. 

Kadheras : 103. 

Kaharas : 104. 

Kakatiyas : 232. 

Kalachuris : 231. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


482 


INDEX 


482 


Kalanjas (Tribes) : 419. 

Kaleyyas (Tribes) : 419. 

Kali Goddess : 90 
Kalinga : 63. 

Kalins (Tribes) : 419. 

Kalluk Bhatta : 272. 

Kalmashpad (King) : 405. 

Kalpa Shudbi : 254. 

Kalpa Sutras : 247. 

Kara : 157, 173. 

Kanada Muni : 234. 

Kanauj : 231. 

Kandalas : 158. 

Kandala Vamsa Dhopanam : 158, 180. 
Kandarpa : 59. 

Kane Memorial Lecture : 78, 248. 

Kane P. V. : 248, 294, 295, 307, 323, 

Kanha: 208, 210. 

Kanhayanas : 208, 209. 

Kanhoji Angria : 236. 

Kanishka King : 379. 

Kank (Sahadev) : 153, 168, 382. 

Kanvas (People) : 274-75. 

Kanyakubja : 62. 

Kapilvastu : 165, 207. 

Karhada Brahmins : 65. 

Karl Marx : 86, 104, 170, 329, 441, 443-46, 
450, 471. 

Karmakand : 247-48, 257, 259, 261. 

Karma Marg : 360, 362-63, 366. 

Karma Purana: 256. 

Karmayoga : 264, 472. 

Kama : 381 83, 385, 387, 390. 

Karsandas Mulji : 324. 

Kartavirya, King : 60-61, 63, 329, 408, 410, 413. 
Karuna : 370. 

Kashiraj King : 384. 

Kashmir : 63, 237. 

Kasi : 224. 

Kashyapa : 63, 155, 171, 253, 419. 

Kassapa : 216. 

Katak, Commentator : 243. 

Katch (Son of Brahaspati) : 154,169. 
Katyayana Smriti : 43. 

Katyayana : 311. 

Katyayana Srauta Sutra-423. 

Kauravas : 241, 246, 250, 261-63, 381-89. 
Kausika King : 399, 406, 407, 410. 
Kaushiki-River : 59. 

Kausitaki Grihya Sutra : 154,169. 

Kausitaki (Vratya) : 426, 

Kautilya : 154, 169, 421, 424, 433-34, 436-37. 
Kayasthas : 45,104. 

Keith, Prof. : 249. 

Kern, Mr. : 371-72. 

Ketkar S. V. : 300. 


Khandvavana : 63. 

Khanumata : 195-96. 

Khanti : 449. 

Khatika : 102. 

Kichaka : 154, 169, 381. 

Kimura Mr. : 379. 

Kings Court : 25. 

Kinnars : 151, 418. 

Konkan : 232. 

Koran : 360. 

Koris : 103. 

Kosala : 167, 175, 204, 216, 222. 224, 445. 
Kosambi, Dharmanand : 240, 242, 244, 251-52. 
Kripacharya: 381-83. 

Krishna : 80. 127-28, 150, 154, 169, 176, 246, 
262-64, 358-59, 364-65, 369-71, 373-78, 
384-91, 468, 470-72. 

Krishna Dwaipayana : 307. 

Krishna Vasudeo : 378. 

Kritayuga : 192-93. 

Kshatriyas : 25-27, 30-32,37-39, 48, S3, 54, 56, 
60-64, 69-71, 80, 99-104, 106-13, 119-22, 
125, 127, 132, 142, 147, 150, 154-55, 169-70, 
174, 182, 197-201, 210-12, 221, 231, 253, 
276-81, 286, 291-92. 295, 307, 310-13, 
317-20, 325-31, 338-41, 346, 348, 351, 353, 
356, 364, 377, 389, 392-93, 396-401, 408-18, 
421-24, 435. 

Kudaldeshkar Brahmin : 65. 

Kumarila Bhatt : 79,155,169. 

Kunti : 157, 173, 388-90. 

Kurma Purana : 256. 

Kurukshetra : 390. 

Kusa King : 53, 

Kushan Tribe: 236. 

Kusanabha (Prajapati’s son) : 53, 396. 
Kusinara : 166. 

Kutadanta : 195-96, 200, 202-05. 

Kuvera : 52,263, 395. 

Lacedaemonians : 333. 

Laja Hoame : 156, 172. 

Laski, Harold H. : 38 (fn). 

Law, Narendra nath : 235 (fn) 

Liberty, Philosophy of : 38, 44. 

Lenin : 461. 

Linga Purana : 256. 

Lohikka Brahmin : 222-228. 

Lokayat: 205. 

London : 167. 

Lucknow : 102. 

Ludovico Di Varthema : 324. 

Lykurgus: 333. 

Lyall, Sir Alfred : 335-36. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


483 


INDEX 


483 


Mackenzie : 167. 

Madhava Rao, Sir T. : 165. 

Madhavi : 155-56, 172. 

Maddarupi (Okkaka’s daughter) : 209, 210. 
Madhvacharya : 248-49. 

Madhusyanda : 55, 58, 404. 

Madhyandin Brahmins : 233. 

Madura : 232. 

Magadha : 37, 195, 267-68,425. 
Mahabharata : 50, 61, 63, 151, 154, 169, 
173,234,239-44,249-53, 257,261, 372-75, 
393, 405-06, 408, 410, 421-22, 472. 
Maha Bhashya : 432. 
Mahabharat-Adiparva : 50. 

Mahabhiras : 103. 

Mahananda : 268. 

Mahapadan Sutta: 370. 

Mahapari Nibbana : 451. 

Mahapari Nibbana Sutta : 369. 
Mahapataka : 83. 

Mahaprajapati Gotami : 452. 
Mahasangikas : 379. 

Mahavir : 451. 

Mahayan Buddhism : 371-72,379-80. 
Maheshwar Bhatt: 242, 252. 

Maheshwar, the God : 300. 

Mahishmati : 61. 

Mains, Sir Henry : 333. 

Maitrei : 432. 

Maitri : 370. 

Majhima Nikaya : 370. 

Makatyam System : 325. 

Malabar : 138,140-41,187, 324-25. 

Malachi: 15. 

Malava: 63. 

Malaya : 229. 

Manava Artha Shastra : 271. 

Manava Dharma Sutra : 271. 

Manava Dharma Shastra : 332. 

Manava Grihya Sutra : 271. 

Manikpura: 102-03. 

Manu : 25-31, 34-43, 48. 53, 67, 70-79, 81, 87, 
108-18, 121-26, 221, 240, 249, 254, 266, 
270-73, 277-95, 301-03, 308-19, 324-32, 
334-45, 347-56, 414, 416, 421-25, 429, 437. 
Manu on : 

(a) Gradation : 72-73,113, 337-38. 

( b ) Hospitality : 345. 

(c) Injunctions : 121-22. 

(d) Marriage : 317. 

(e) Naming ceremony : 38. 

(/) Occupation : 111, 338. 

( g ) Offences — 

(1) Abuse: 28, 109,318,351. 

(2) Adultery : 29,109-10,352. 

(3) Arrogance : 29,109,352. 


(4) Assault: 29,109, 352. 

(5) Defamation : 28, 108-09, 318, 
351. 

(6) False Evidence : 28, 351. 

(7) Punishments : 30. 

(h) Privileges re : 

(1) Finance : 342. 

(2) Marriages : 339. 

(3) Occupation : 111-12,339-42. 

(i) Sacred Thread : 32-33,100-01, 347 

(j) Salutations : 27. 346. 

( k ) Shudras and Women : 347-50. 

(t) Social Intercourse : 344-47. 

(m) Social Status : 114,122, 345-46. 

(re) Vratyas : 350. 

Manu Smriti (Laws of Manu) : 70, 76, 78, 80-81, 
87, 107, 239-40, 244, 108-18, 121-26, 150, 
270-73, 276-84, 288, 291, 303, 311, 314, 317, 
326, 332-38, 414, 467, 469,471. 

Manu Vaivasvata : 393. 

Manorama (Sister of Uttar) : 382. 
Manvantara : 254,287. 

Mara : 204,222. 

Maratha Rule : 64, 79. 

Marathas : 65, 233. 

Marichi Rishi : 48, 393. 

Marisha (Soma’s daughter): 155, 171. 
Maritain Jacques : 95. 

Markandeya Puran : 400. 

Marshal : 85. 

Maru : 155, 171. 

Marxian Creed : 444. 

Marxian Socialism : 443. 

Marxism : 48. 

Mathura : 155. 

Matru Savarnya : 308. 

Matsyagandha : 157, 173, 291, 307. 

Matsya Purana : 256. 

Mauryas : 268, 270-71, 274-75, 277, 412. 
Maurya Empire : 71. 

Max Muller, Prof. : 7, 86, 233, 333, 336, 359. 
Maya : 358. 

Mazdaism : 335. 

Medhatithi : 270. 

Megasthenes : 130, 141, 371, 373,378. 

Meru : 406. 

Menaka (Apsara) : 58, 291, 307. 

Menvis : 333. 

Metta : 449. 

Mevad : 231. 

Mihirkula : 237. 

Mills, J. S. : 25, 44, 64, 66, 246-47, 259, 432. 
Minos : 333. 

Mitakshara : 294. 

Mlenehhas : 242. 

Moab: 14, 15. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


484 


INDEX 


484 

Mohd., Gazni : 243, 252, 270. 

Mohd., Ghori : 243, 252, 374. 

Momjack Nagar : 89. 

Mongols : 273. 

Monks (Buddhist) : see Bhikkus. 

Moors : 102, 134-35, 140. 

Morad : 14. 

Moral Equality : 97. 

Morality : 12, 442. 

Morias : 89. 

Moses : 333. 

Mudita : 370. 

Muslims : 100, 126, 129, 134, 142, 229-30, 232, 
242, 251-52, 273-75, 304, 335, 374. 

Muslim Invasion : 229-32, 236, 238, 242-43, 
251-52. 

Mussolini : 322. 

Mythical Theology : 5. 

Nagas : 267-68, 307, 419, 465. 

Nahusha (king) : 50-52, 170, 172, 329, 393-95. 
Nakula : 388. 

Nalanda : 232. 

Namadheya : 122. 

Namboodri Brahmins : 324. 

Nanda (cowherd) : 221. 

Nanda, the king : 268, 422-23. 

Naomi : 17. 

Napoleon : 330. 

Narada : 26, 389. 

Narada Smriti : 107, 270. 

Nayadis : 92. 

Nayar : 137-40. 

Nazis : 75, 126-27. 

Nazism : 74-75,128. 

Nekkhamma : 449. 

Nepal : 237. 

Nietzsche, F. W. : 67, 74-77, 116-17, 123-24, 321. 
Nighantu : 234. 

Nimbarkacharya : 248-49. 

Nimi, the king : 52-53, 329, 396, 413. 

Nirvana : 369, 445-46, 448. 

Nirukta : 234, 419. 

Nishada : 49-56, 393, 418, 426, 428. 

Noble Eight-Fold Path : 447-49. 

Non-Aryan : 307, 418, 420-21, 425-26. 
Non-Brahmins : 65, 146, 255, 266, 277, 281, 
290, 304. 

Non-Communists : 450. 

Nurbeda River : 231. 

Nun (Buddhist) : 310. 

Ochler, Richard : 75. 

Odantapuri : 232. 


Okkaka, the King : 207-10. 

Okkamukh : 207. 

Old Testament : 14, 17. 

Oscar Wilde : 71, 285. 

Out Cast : 301-04. 

Pahalawas : 54, 397. 

Paijavan : 422. 

Paila (Vyasa’s pupil) : 241, 250. 

Pal Dynasty : 231. 

Palestine : 15. 

Panchamas : 99. 

Panchashila : 186, 447. 

Panchatantra : 248. 

Panchapriya caste : 103. 

Pandavas: 154, 168, 241, 250, 261-62, 
381-91, 421. 

Pandu : 157, 173, 243, 253, 261-62, 273. 
Panini : 37, 234, 273, 432. 

Panna : 449. 

Paramitas : 449-50. 

Parashar Rishi : 156-57, 170-73, 291, 307. 
Paravasu : 412. 

Parmars : 231. 

Parahurama : 62-64, 170, 328, 330, 409-10, 412. 
Parthia : 230. 

Pasenadi king : 175, 204, 216, 222, 224-25, 445. 
Pataliputra : 237, 337, 379. 

Patanjali : 432. 

Paul St. : 97,100. 

Paulomas : 419. 

Paura : 421. 

Persia : 128. 

Persians : 321, 336. 

Peshawar : 48. 

Peter : 325. 

Philip of Macedon : 14. 

Philistines : 14. 

Philo-Bablias : 16. 

Philosophy of Hinduism : 

(а) Equality : 25-37. 

(б) Ethics : 71-87. 

(c) Fraternity : 44-66. 

(d) Liberty : 38-44. 

(e) Utility : 66-71. 

Phoenician : 16. 

Pig Philosophy : 462. 

Pilgrim Fathers : 97, 100. 

Pishachas : 419. 

Pitra Savarnya : 308. 

Plato : 4-5, 40, 86, 321-22. 

Plowman, Max : 86 
Pokkharasadi : 204-6, 215-220. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


485 


INDEX 


485 


Poleas : 140-41. 

Portuguese : 134, 141. 

Potthapada Brahmin : 444-46. 

Prahlad : 426, 

Prajapati : 49, 53, 57, 71, 106, 152, 392-93, 396. 
Prajnaneshwar Yati: 286, 289. 

Pratihars : 231. 

Pratiloma : 307-08. 

Prayashchitta : 143. 

Pritha, the king : 264. 

Pringle-Pattison : 3, 5. 

Prithvi Raj : 231. 

Proletariat — 

Dictatorship of : 444, 450. 

Pulamas : 242, 244, 251. 

Punarbhu : 294. 

Punarbhava : 295. 

Punjab : 45, 102, 142, 231, 237. 

Punna (slave girl): 221. 

Punnika (slave girl): 221. 

Puranas : 48, 166, 239, 242, 244, 251, 253-57, 
355, 373, 375. 

Pururavas : 50,170, 329, 393. 

Purusha Sukta : 80. 

PurvaMimansa Sutra : 79, 247, 262, 265, 267, 423. 
Pushkara : 58. 

Pushyamitra-Sunga: 239-40, 244, 257, 268-69, 
271-73, 275-77, 291, 295. 

Rabbinism : 116. 

Radhakrishnan Dr. S. : 369. 

Rajputs : 105, 134, 231, 236, 238. 

Rajasuya Yajna : 375. 

Rajawade V. K. : 246. 

Rakshasas : 405-8, 419. 

Rambha (Apsara) : 59. 

Ramanujacharya : 248. 

Rama : 383, 468 470 

Ramayana : 21, 39, 43-44, 53-54, 57, 396. 
Ratnis : 421, 432. 

Ravana : 243, 252. 

Renuka : 410. 

Rhys Davids : 220, 222, 369. 

Richika : 57, 62-63, 404, 409. 

Rig Veda : 82, 234, 277, 420, 422-23, 426. 
Robertson : 6. 

Rohit : 403. 

Roma : 128, 243. 

Romaharshana : 253. 

Roman Conquerors : 97. 

Rousseau : 86. 

Rudra : 51, 263, 394, 419, 427. 

Rukmi : 390. 

Ruskin : 86. 

Russia : 444, 447, 461. 


Russian-Revolution : 21, 462 
Ruth : 17. 

Sabbath : 11. 

Sabuktagin : 231. 

Sachi (Indrani): 396. 

Sadharana Dharmas : 334. 

Sahadeo : 388. 

Sahyadrikhand : 48, 106. 

Sairandhri : 154, 169. 

Sakya : 165, 204-09, 222, 451 
Sakya’s Congress Hall : 207. 
Salavatika : 222-25. 

Samana Phala Sutta : 204, 212, 227. 
Sama Veda : 234, 248, 277, 426. 
Samavedi Brahmins : 268. 
Sambandham Unions : 325. 

Sambhar (State) :231. 

Samorin : 324. 

Samudra Gupta, king : 269. 
Sanatkumar : 50, 393,424. 

Sanat Sujata : 386. 

Sangha : 371,446, 452, 461. 

Sanjaya : 246-47, 262, 385-87, 390. 
Sankhya : 264, 364, 370, 377-78. 
Sankhyayog : 472. 

Samskaras : 107, 315. 

Sanskrit : 346. 

Santa Maria : 136. 

Sanyas : 107, 123, 221, 
Sanyasashram : 261. 

Saptapadi : 157, 172. 

Sapta Rishi (Saptasrshi) : 87, 286. 
Saraswat Brahmin : 45, 50, 65, 102. 
Sarasvati : 406-08. 

Sariputta : 449. 

Sarkar B. K. : 323. 

Sasanka, king : 327. 

Satadru : 406. 

Satavalekar M. D. : 419. 

Sati : 221, 294-95. 

Satpatha Brahmana : 152, 331, 423. 
Satyaki : 384-85, 388-89. 

Satyavati : 62, 156, 171, 409-10. 
Satyavrata : 398-400. 

Saurasenis : 373. 

Sauti : 241, 250, 372, 379. 

Saunaka : 292. 

Saviya (Taramati) : 400-01. 
Sayanacharya : 426. 

Seal, Dr. Brajandra Nath : 323. 
Seleukos Nickator : 130. 

Semites : 15. 

Sena Kings : 231. 

Sen G. P. : 336. 

Sen Surendra Nath : 236. 

Sermon on the Mount : 460. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


486 


INDEX 


486 


Shakas : 54, 397. 

Shaka Era. : 372,374. 

Shakuni : 382, 384. 

Shakuntala : 307. 

Shalya : 385. 

Shalya Parva : 406. 

Sharni tree : 382. 

Shankaracharya : 239-40, 244-45, 248-49, 
360, 432. 

Shankara, God : 263. 

Shantarakshit : 240, 245. 

Shantanu : 157,173,291, 307. 

Shantiparva : 373,422. 

Sharmistha : 291, 307. 

Shastri, Dr. Harprasad : 235, 269, 425. 
Shatanik (Virat’s Brother) : 381. 

Shatrupa : 155, 171 
Sheelas : 187, 212-13,447. 

Shikhandi (Draupadi’s son) : 384. 

Shishupal: 375. 

Shiva : 54, 237, 255, 335, 398, 401, 468, 470. 
Shrauta Sutra : 432. 

Shrotriya : 158, 234. 

Shrutis : 78-79, 114. 

Shudras : 

Before Manu : 418, 428. 

Duties of : 112, 312, 418. 

Ideal of life for- 39-40. 

Not to be : 

Judge-417. 

Respected-416. 

Prohibition to : 

(а) Marriage-416. 

(б) Sacraments-33-35. 

(c) Vedas-42, 311,417. 

(d) Wealth-40, 41, 74, 311-12, 
Punishments for-417. 

Servile name of-38,418. 

Servile Status of-74, 121, 418. 

Shudra : 35-42, 70, 74, 99, 106-10, 112. 119, 121-22, 
125, 127, 132, 142-143, 147, 150, 169-70,220-21, 
230, 242, 251, 266, 275, 280-81, 286-81, 286-88, 
291-93, 309-20, 326-31, 338-41, 346, 350, 
353-54, 365, 371, 386,416-25,428,430-31, 
435, 446-68. 

Shuka Rishi : 241,250. 

Shukracharya : 154, 169, 432. 

Shwapakas : 170. 

Sialkot : 237. 

Siam : 229. 

Siddhas : 381. 

Siddharth-See Buddha. 

Sikhism : 335. 

Silahara : 231. 

Sinha Senapati : 450. 

Sind : 230-31. 236, 238, 326-27, 328 
Siri : 163, 185. 

Sishunag : 267-68. 


Sita : 172, 212-13, 243, 252. 

Sivi, king : 63. 

Skandagupta : 242, 251. 

Skanda Purana : 256. 

Smith, Prof. Robertson : 13-16, 64. 

Smith, Vincent A. : 230, 232, 237-38, 248, 269. 
Smriti Dharma : 254. 

Smritis : 78-81, 112, 114, 323, 332, 378-81. 
Socialism : 443-44. 

Socrates : 5. 

Soma : 52, 154-55, 169, 171, 173, 175, 395, 
413-14, 419, 424. 

Soma Yaga : 423. 

Spencer, Herbert : 86. 

Srauta Sutra : 248 (Fn). 

Sruti : 114. 

Sthanutirtha : 406. 

Stridhan : 433-34. 

Strongtyre : 453-56. 

Stupas : 237. 

Subha(King) : 221, 398, 422. 

Sudas, King : 170, 398, 422. 

Sudeshna : 154, 169. 

Sukra : 49. 

Sulabha : 432. 

Sukanya (wife of Chyavana) : 424. 

Sumati Bhargava : 240, 270-71. 

Sumukha (king) : 53, 170, 329. 

Sunassepa : 58, 404-5. 

Sungas : 268-69, 274-75. 

Superman : 71, 77-78, 117, 121, 123-24, 470. 
Suppiya : 176-77. 

Sura (wine) : 154-55, 169, 175. 

Suras (Devas) : 418-20. 

Surya : 155, 157, 171, 173, 225, 390, 419, 427. 
Susharma ; 381-82. 

Sutas : 255, 383,422. 

Sutta Nipata : 175. 

Synod : 131. 

Syria: 15. 

Swayambhu : 112. 

Tailangana : 233. 

Taivijja Sutta : 370. 

Tallyrand : 330. 

Tamralipika : 63. 

Tanha : 364. 

Tantra Vartika : 155. 

Tathagata : 178-79, 187, 195. 

Tatvasar sangraha : 240, 245. 

Tawny Mr. 364. 

Telang K. T. : 240, 244, 358, 366-67, 371. 
Tennyson : 87. 

Theravada : 379. 

Theragatha : 221. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


487 


INDEX 


487 


Therigatha : 221. 

Thugs : 90-91. 

Thurston : 92. 

Tiele Prof. : 4,24. 

Tilak B. G-240, 244, 360, 363, 366-67, 369-76. 
Tolstoy Leo : 86. 

Travancore : 232. 

Trilochanpal : 231. 

Trikalinga : 232. 

Tripitaka :441. 

Trisanku, King : 55-57, 399-400. 

Tuias : 139. 

Tulika : 159, 181. 

Tukhuras : 49 
Tumbhuras : 49. 

Turks : 273. 

Turkey : 236. 

Uddyoga Parva : 150, 384-91, 393, 472 
Ukkatha : 204, 217-20. 

Uluka : 391. 

Uma : 300. 

Unapproachables : 92. 

Unseeables : 92. 

Untouchables : 92, 104, 107. 

Upakhyavas : 254. 

Upali : 221. 

Upanayana : 100-01, 287-89, 424, 432. 
Upanishads : 7, 81, 84-87, 245-47, 260, 269, 369. 
Upapataka : 83. 

Upaplowya Nagari : 384, 390. 

Upekkha : 370, 449. 

Urvashi Apsara : 50, 53, 291. 

Usha : 155, 171. 

Utathya Rishi : 413. 

Utopian Socialists : 443. 

Uttar : 382-84. 

Uttarayana : 373-74. 

Utgikar Mr. : 244. 

Uttarmimansa : 247-48. 

Vaidya C. V. : 231, 252, 295. 

Vaidikas : 234. 

Vaishali : 450-52. 

Vaishyas : 99-101, 106-110, 112-13, 119-20, 
122, 125, 127, 132, 142, 147, 154-55, 169- 
70, 174, 221, 277-82, 286, 310, 317-18, 320, 
326-28, 330-31, 338-41, 348-50, 353-56, 
416-18, 421-24, 435. 

Vaishampayan : 241, 248, 250, 253, 372. 
Vaishnava : 324. 

Valenfinionas : 303. 

Vali : 383. 

Valmiki : 243, 252. 


Vallabhacharya : 248, 259. 

Vamacharitra : 254. 

Vamadeva Vrata : 156, 171, 216. 

Vamaka : 216. 

Vamana Purana : 256. 

Vanaparva : 242,251, 374,410. 

Vanaprastha : 123. 

Varaha-Purana : 256. 

Vaina : 26, 48, 69-71, 80-81, 99, 142, 146-47, 
155, 169, 275, 278-79, 285-91, 307-08, 315, 
319, 326-28, 334, 356, 360, 364, 419-22. 
Varanashram Dharma : 334. 

Vratyastoma : 425. 

Varshavas : 451. 

Varuna : 52, 54, 360, 364, 395, 398, 407, 
419, 427. 

Vasistha : 52-60, 155, 171, 216, 291, 329, 396-99, 
403-07, 413, 422. 

Vasubandhu : 240, 245. 

Vashatkara : 392. 

Vayu : 62, 411, 413-14. 

Vayu Purana : 256. 

Vedas : 7, 33-36, 42-43, 46, 48, 60-62, 71-74, 
78-81, 85, 111-12, 114-15, 118, 121-22, 125, 
189, 198, 205,218, 233-34, 246, 253, 257-53, 
260, 265, 266, 272, 278, 280-84, 291, 302, 
304, 309-11, 315, 318, 321-22, 327, 338-399, 
343-50, 354, 356, 363-65, 368, 392, 408, 417, 
423, 426, 431-32, 466-68. 

Vedant : 238, 257-59,261, 264, 358, 377-78, 
Vedant Sutras : 244, 247-49, 257. 

Vedangas : 355, 468. 

Vedic Literature : 245-47, 255. 

Vedokta : 46. 

Vena (King) : 48-49, 170, 329, 392-93, 426-27. 
Vessamitta (Vishwamitra) : 216. 

Viellans : 420. 

Vichitra Virya : 307. 

Videha : 37, 63, 258. 

Vidur : 386-90. 

Vidula : 389. 

Vidyadhari : 432. 

Vijnaneshwar : 294, 313. 

Vijnan Vad : 240, 245. 

Vikramaditya King : 253. 

Vikramsila : 232. 

Virat : 153, 168-69, 381-84. 

Virat Nagari : 382-84. 

Virat Parva : 150, 169. 

Vireshwarananda Swami : 257. 

Vishnu : 51, 58, 83, 294, 355, 394, 398, 404-05, 
419, 427, 468, 470. 

Vishnu Purana : 52, 255, 256, 263, 396, 400, 
409, 426. 

Vishnu Smriti : 294. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\voI3-05.indd MK 


SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


488 


INDEX 


488 

Vishvamitra : 53-61, 156, 172, 216, 291, 307, 
329, 373, 396-407, 410, 412, 422. 
Vishvrupa : 376, 389. 

Voltaire : 86, 114. 

Vrashalas : 242, 251. 

Vrata Dharma : 254. 

Vratyas : 350, 425. 

Vrishni Kingdom : 385. 

Vritra : 50, 393, 420. 

Vrihaspati : (See Brahaspati) 

Vyas : 241, 246, 248, 250, 253, 257, 262, 
291, 372, 375, 387. 

Vayu Purana : 256. 

Widow : 431. 

Warangal : 232. 

Wasudeo (Arjuna’s Son) : 384. 

Weber Prof : 367, 369. 

White Yajur Veda : 233. 

Wide Realm : 196-200. 

Winternitz : 367, 371, 372. 

Wilson, Prof. : 367. 

Woman : — 

As a gift : 324. 

As a Slave : 431. 

Ideal of Life for : 432. 

In Pre-Manu days : 432-37. 
Maintenance of : 431. 

Naming ceremony of : 38. 

Prevention of — 

From Freedom : 429-30. 

From Intellectual pursuit : 431. 
Punishment for : 431. 


Right to — 

Re : Marriage : 430. 

Re : Sacrifice : 431. 

Re : Veda : 431. 

Yadav (Son of Arjuna) : 384. 

Yadavas : 263, 232, 384. 

Yadnabhumi : 156, 171. 

Yadu : 307. 

Yagus Samhita : 234. 

Yajna : 174-75, 188, 195, 242, 264, 362-63, 
365. 

Yajnakalkya Rishi : 26, 79, 107, 259, 294, 
319. 

Yajnyavalkya Smriti : 107, 234, 294,432. 
Yajurveda : 277, 429. 

Yajnikas : 234. 

Yaksha : 151. 

Yama : 52, 54, 155, 171, 327, 395, 398, 427. 
Yamataggi : 216. 

Yami : 155, 171. 

Yavana : 54, 397. 

Yask : 171. 

Yayati : 156, 172, 291, 307, 412. 

Yedukas : 242, 251-52. 

Yudhishthir : 382, 384-90. 

Yugas : 128. 

Zamolixis : 333. 

Zarathustra : 75-76, 123, 333. 

Zenu : 333. 

Zorastrians : 128. 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\vol3-05.indd 


MK SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


489 


blank 


z:\ ambedkar\vol-3\vol3-05.indd 


MK SJ+YS 28-10-2013>YS>9-12-2013 


490 


blank 


